Comments made decades ago by the architects of the cancer immunosurveillance hypothesis, Burnet and Thomas, that “there is little ground for optimism about cancer” (Burnet, 1957) and “the greatest trouble with the idea of immunosurveillance is that it cannot be shown to exist in experimental animals” (Thomas, 1982), reflect the problems that, until recently, fomented intense debate over whether natural immune defense mechanisms can protect the host against the development of cancers of nonviral origin. The difficulty was clear: if immunosurveillance of developing tumors in immunocompetent hosts was indeed successful, then how could such an apparently invisible process be experimentally revealed? With the development of mouse tumor models using inbred mice with molecularly defined immunodeficiencies, it has become possible to demonstrate the existence of a cancer immunosurveillance process that can prevent primary tumor growth. Moreover, there is an emerging recognition that cancer immunosurveillance represents only one step of a broader process, termed cancer immunoediting, that stresses the dual host-protective versus tumor-sculpting actions of the immune system in cancer Shankaran et al. 2001, Dunn et al. 2002, Dunn et al. 2004. Herein, we summarize recent work on the cancer immunosurveillance and immunoediting processes—underscoring a new optimism that an enhanced understanding of naturally occurring immune system/tumor interactions will lead to the development of more effective immunologically based cancer therapies.
From Cancer Immunosurveillance to Cancer Immunoediting
In 1909, Paul Ehrlich predicted that the immune system repressed the growth of carcinomas that he envisaged would otherwise occur with great frequency (Ehrlich, 1909), thus initiating a century of contentious debate over immunologic control of neoplasia. Fifty years later, as immunologists gained an enhanced understanding of transplantation and tumor immunobiology and immunogenetics, F. Macfarlane Burnet and Lewis Thomas revisited the topic of natural immune protection against cancer. Burnet's thinking was shaped by a consideration of immune tolerance; he believed that tumor cell-specific neo-antigens could provoke an effective immunologic reaction that would eliminate developing cancers Burnet 1957, Burnet 1964, Burnet 1971. Alternatively, Thomas's early view was evolutionary in nature; he theorized that complex long-lived organisms must possess mechanisms to protect against neoplastic disease similar to those mediating homograft rejection (Thomas, 1959). With the functional demonstration of mouse tumor-specific antigens supporting the ideas of Ehrlich, Burnet, and Thomas (Old and Boyse, 1964), the cancer immunosurveillance hypothesis, which stated that sentinel thymus-dependent cells of the body constantly surveyed host tissues for nascently transformed cells (Burnet, 1970), gained recognition. Despite subsequent challenges to this hypothesis over the next several decades Stutman 1974, Stutman 1979, new studies in the 1990s—fueled by technologic advances in mouse genetics and monoclonal antibody (mAb) production—reinvigorated and ultimately validated the cancer immunosurveillance concept Smyth et al. 2001b, Dunn et al. 2002, Dunn et al. 2004 and expanded it to incorporate the contributions of both innate and adaptive immunity.
However, there has been a growing recognition that immunosurveillance represents only one dimension of the complex relationship between the immune system and cancer Dunn et al. 2002, Dunn et al. 2004, Schreiber et al. 2004. Recent work has shown that the immune system may also promote the emergence of primary tumors with reduced immunogenicity that are capable of escaping immune recognition and destruction (Shankaran et al., 2001). These findings prompted the development of the cancer immunoediting hypothesis to more broadly encompass the potential host-protective and tumor-sculpting functions of the immune system throughout tumor development Dunn et al. 2002, Dunn et al. 2004. Cancer immunoediting is a dynamic process composed of three phases: elimination, equilibrium, and escape (Figure 1). Elimination represents the classical concept of cancer immunosurveillance, equilibrium is the period of immune-mediated latency after incomplete tumor destruction in the elimination phase, and escape refers to the final outgrowth of tumors that have outstripped immunological restraints of the equilibrium phase.
Normal cells (gray) subject to common oncogenic stimuli ultimately undergo transformation and become tumor cells (red) (top). Even at early stages of tumorigenesis, these cells may express distinct tumor-specific markers and generate proinflammatory “danger” signals that initiate the cancer immunoediting process (bottom). In the first phase of elimination, cells and molecules of innate and adaptive immunity, which comprise the cancer immunosurveillance network, may eradicate the developing tumor and protect the host from tumor formation. However, if this process is not successful, the tumor cells may enter the equilibrium phase where they may be either maintained chronically or immunologically sculpted by immune “editors” to produce new populations of tumor variants. These variants may eventually evade the immune system by a variety of mechanisms and become clinically detectable in the escape phase.
The Elimination Phase: Assembling the Cancer Immunosurveillance Network
Pivotal studies on IFN-γ Dighe et al. 1994, Kaplan et al. 1998, Shankaran et al. 2001, Street et al. 2001, Street et al. 2002 and perforin van den Broek et al. 1996, Smyth et al. 2000a, Smyth et al. 2000b, Street et al. 2001, Street et al. 2002 have shown that deficiencies in key immunologic molecules enhanced host susceptibility to both chemically induced and spontaneous tumors, demonstrating for the first time a critical prediction of the prescient, but previously unsubstantiated, cancer immunosurveillance hypothesis. Furthermore, other compelling data suggest that immunosurveillance is not restricted to mouse models but also exists in humans Dunn et al. 2002, Dunn et al. 2004. Thus, today the question is not if—but, rather, how—cancer immunosurveillance functions as an extrinsic tumor suppressor and protects the immunocompetent host from the development of neoplasia. In this section, we discuss current work on the elimination phase of the cancer immunoediting process that specifically addresses the following three central questions. (1) What cells protect the host from tumor development? (2) What are the critical effector functions of the immune system in cancer immunosurveillance? (3) How does the immune system distinguish between a transformed cell and its normal progenitor?
Adaptive and Innate Immune Cells Play Critical Roles in Cancer Immunosurveillance
Rapidly accumulating data have begun to elucidate the cellular basis of cancer immunosurveillance and demonstrate that lymphocytes of both the adaptive and innate immune compartments prevent tumor development. One of the most definitive studies performed to date employed gene-targeted mice lacking the recombinase activating gene (RAG)-2 (Shankaran et al., 2001) and demonstrated that lymphocytes expressing rearranged antigen receptors play critical roles in the cancer immunosurveillance process. Mice lacking RAG-2 (or its obligate partner RAG-1) cannot somatically rearrange lymphocyte antigen receptors and therefore cannot produce peripheral αβ T cells, B cells, NKT cells, or γδ T cells (Shinkai et al., 1992). Since RAG-2 expression is limited to cells of the lymphoid system, RAG-2−/− mice provided an appropriate model to exclusively study the effects of host lymphocyte deficiency on tumor development. Unlike other genetic models of immunodeficiency (such as SCID mice), the absence of RAG-2 does not affect DNA damage repair pathways in nonimmune cells undergoing transformation. Following subcutaneous injection of the chemical carcinogen 3′-methylcholanthrene (MCA), 129/SvEv RAG-2−/− mice developed sarcomas at the injection site faster and with greater frequency than strain-matched wild-type controls (Shankaran et al., 2001). After 160 days, 30/52 RAG-2−/− mice formed tumors, compared with 11/57 wild-type mice (p < 0.0001). Similar findings were obtained in C57BL/6 RAG-1−/− mice treated with MCA (Smyth et al., 2001a).

In addition, Helicobacter-negative RAG-2−/− 129/SvEv mice aged in a specific pathogen-free mouse facility and maintained on broad-spectrum antibiotics administered every other month developed significantly more spontaneous epithelial tumors than did wild-type counterparts (Shankaran et al., 2001; A.T. Bruce and R.D.S., unpublished data). Specifically, 31/32 RAG-2−/− mice (13–28 months old) developed spontaneous neoplasia, predominantly of the intestine. Eight had premalignant intestinal adenomas, 22 had intestinal adenocarcinomas, and one had an intestinal adenoma and a lung adenocarcinoma. In contrast, 21/33 wild-type mice remained neoplasia free to the end of their lives. Of the wild-type mice that developed neoplastic disease, six had adenomas of the Harderian gland, lung, intestine, stomach, or liver, while six others developed unrelated cancers that predominantly appeared late in life. Thus, lymphocytes protect mice against both chemically-induced and spontaneous tumor formation.
Subsequent studies have extended these findings by identifying which of the possible RAG-dependent lymphocyte subsets contribute to host antitumor defense. This work highlighted roles for γδ T cells, αβ T cells, and NKT cells in the immunosurveillance process. Mice lacking either αβ T cells (TCR β−/− mice) or γδ T cells (TCR δ−/− mice) are more susceptible to MCA-induced tumor formation than wild-type mice (on either an FVB or C57BL/6 genetic background) Girardi et al. 2001, Gao et al. 2003. In contrast, using a carcinogenesis model involving initiation with 7, 12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA) and promotion with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA), host protection against tumor formation was found to be more dependent on the action of γδ T cells than αβ T cells. Whereas FVB strain TCR δ−/− mice formed significantly more DMBA/TPA tumors than wild-type FVB controls, FVB strain TCR β−/− did not Girardi et al. 2001, Girardi et al. 2003. However, TCR β−/− × δ−/− mice were significantly more susceptible to DMBA/TPA carcinogenesis than singly-deficient TCR δ−/− mice (Girardi et al., 2003), revealing a host-protective role for αβ T cells in the setting of γδ T cell deficiency. Interestingly, in the same study TCR δ−/− mice exhibited the highest ratio of carcinomas to papillomas, suggesting that γδ T cells regulate the progression of developing papillomas to more aggressive carcinomas. Together, these results reveal that αβ and γδ T cell subsets make critical, but distinct, contributions to host antitumor defense mechanisms.

NK and NKT cells also participate in cancer immunosurveillance. C57BL/6 mice, depleted of both NK and NKT cells by using the anti-NK1.1 mAb, were two to three times more susceptible to MCA-induced tumorigenesis than wild-type controls (Smyth et al., 2001a). A similar effect was observed in C57BL/6 mice treated with anti-asialo-GM1, which selectively depletes NK but not NKT cells. Although anti-asialo-GM1 can also deplete activated macrophages, the latter observation nevertheless supports the involvement of innate immune cells in blocking primary tumor development. NKT cells were also implicated in immunosurveillance by two additional observations. First, Jα281−/− mice, lacking Vα14Jα281-expressing invariant NKT cells, developed MCA-induced sarcomas at a higher frequency than wild-type controls (Smyth et al., 2000a). Second, mice treated with the NKT cell-activating ligand α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer) throughout MCA-induced tumorigenesis exhibited a reduced incidence of tumors and displayed a longer latency period to tumor formation than control mice (Hayakawa et al., 2003).

A recent provocative study by Cui et al. (Cui et al., 2003) provides further evidence that innate immune cells comprise an important arm of the immunosurveillance network. A single BALB/c mouse was serendipitously found that failed to form ascites when injected intraperitoneally with the extremely aggressive S180 sarcoma cell line. Subsequent breeding revealed that the observed cancer resistance trait was germline transmissible and was likely controlled by a single autosomal dominant locus. In addition, the resulting “spontaneous regression/complete remission” (SR/CR) mice were able to kill a range of both syngeneic and allogeneic tumor cells derived from multiple tissue sites. Despite their avid antitumor resistance, SR/CR mice did not exhibit autoimmune pathology or shortened lifespan. Interestingly, resistance to S180 was also observed when the SR/CR trait was bred onto a nude genetic background, suggesting that the SR/CR phenotype is predominantly mediated by innate immune cells. Characterization of the locus controlling the SR/CR phenotype should provide new insights into innate immune control of tumor growth.
Taken together, these data not only highlight roles for both innate and adaptive immune components in the elimination phase of cancer immunoediting but also underline the complexity of the host's immune response to developing tumors. Specifically, cancer immunosurveillance appears to be a multivariable process in which immunologic responses are influenced by a tumor's cellular origin, mode of transformation, anatomic location, stromal response, cytokine production profile, and inherent immunogenicity. Thus, it remains critical to assess the effects of a wide range of immunologic components on tumor development in many different models—both chemically induced and spontaneous—to determine whether the immunosurveillance of all cancer-susceptible tissues of the body is globally similar or locally distinct.
Effector Functions Underlying Immunosurveillance: IFNγ Production and Cytotoxicity
IFNγ Production
The studies that identified physiologically relevant cellular effectors of immunosurveillance have been complemented by studies that defined two of the critical tasks these immune cells must effect to eradicate developing tumors: the production of IFN-γ and the ability to kill. Endogenously produced interferon-γ (IFN-γ) was shown to protect the host against the growth of transplanted tumors and also the formation of primary chemically induced and spontaneous tumors Dighe et al. 1994, Kaplan et al. 1998, Shankaran et al. 2001, Street et al. 2001, Street et al. 2002. Injection of neutralizing mAbs for IFN-γ into mice bearing transplanted, established Meth A tumors blocked LPS-induced tumor rejection (Dighe et al., 1994). In addition, transplanted fibrosarcomas grew faster and more efficiently in mice treated with IFN-γ-specific mAbs. In models of primary tumor formation, IFN-γ-insensitive 129/SvEv mice lacking either the IFNGR1 ligand binding subunit of the IFN-γ receptor or STAT1, the transcription factor that mediates much of IFN-γ's biologic effects on cells (Bach et al., 1997), were found to be 10–20 times more sensitive than wild-type mice to MCA tumor induction (Kaplan et al., 1998). These mice developed more tumors, more rapidly, and at lower carcinogen doses than did wild-type controls. Similar results were obtained in independent experiments by using C57BL/6 mice lacking the gene encoding IFN-γ (Street et al., 2001). In models of genetically driven tumorigenesis, mice lacking both the p53 tumor suppressor gene and either IFNGR1 or STAT1 formed a wider tumor spectrum compared to IFN-γ-sensitive mice lacking p53 only (Kaplan et al., 1998). In another study, 16/32 of IFN-γ−/− C57BL/6 mice developed disseminated lymphomas compared to 0/39 wild-type C57BL/6 mice (Street et al., 2002).
The overlap between the IFN-γ- and lymphocyte-dependent tumor suppressor pathways was revealed by comparing tumor formation in 129/SvEv mice lacking IFN-γ responsiveness (IFNGR1−/− or STAT1−/− mice), lymphocytes (RAG-2−/− mice), or both (RAG-2−/− x STAT1−/−) (RkSk mice) (Shankaran et al., 2001). Each group of mice formed three times more chemically induced tumors than syngeneic wild-type mice when injected with 100 μg of MCA. Since no significant differences were detected between any of the gene-targeted mice, it was concluded that the IFN-γ/STAT1- and lymphocyte-dependent tumor suppressor mechanisms were largely overlapping. However, RkSk mice developed spontaneous breast tumors that were not observed in wild-type or RAG-2−/− mice, therefore demonstrating that the overlap between the two pathways was incomplete.
Additional work has begun to identify the relevant cellular sources and targets of IFN-γ in immunosurveillance. Recent work suggests that γδ T cells are an important source of IFN-γ during the development of protective antitumor responses (Gao et al., 2003). To directly test if γδ T cells were a physiologically important source of IFN-γ in blocking primary tumor formation, two sets of bone marrow chimeras were generated. In the control group, IFN-γ−/− mice were lethally irradiated and reconstituted with a mixture of bone marrow from TCR β−/− IFN-γ+/+ and TCR δ−/− IFN-γ+/+mice, whereas the experimental group consisted of lethally irradiated IFN-γ−/− mice reconstituted with a mixture of bone marrow from TCRβ−/− × IFN-γ−/− and TCR δ−/− IFN-γ+/+ mice. Thus, the only deficiency in the reconstituted experimental group was that mature γδ T cells could not produce IFN-γ. When challenged with MCA, the control bone marrow chimera group displayed a susceptibility to tumor formation similar to that of wild-type mice. In contrast, chimeric mice with γδ T cells that could not produce IFN-γ were significantly more susceptible to MCA-induced tumor formation than wild-type counterparts and displayed an increased MCA susceptibility, indistinguishable from that of IFN-γ−/− mice. Thus, γδ T cells are one physiologically relevant source of IFN-γ in the cancer immunosurveillance process. Additional work is required to identify if there are other cellular sources of IFN-γ during tumor development and to determine whether other IFN-γ-producing cells participate in responses to different types of tumors.
More is known about the physiologically relevant targets of IFN-γ's actions. Host cells are important targets of IFN-γ during development of protective antitumor immune responses. STAT1−/− mice with generalized IFN-γ/IFN-αβ insensitivity are more sensitive to MCA primary tumor induction (Kaplan et al., 1998) and also cannot reject highly immunogenic transplanted IFN-γ-sensitive tumor cells (Fallarino and Gajewski, 1999; V. Shankaran and R.D.S., unpublished data). At least in part, these results are explained by a requirement for IFN-γ sensitivity at the level of the host immune compartment. Through its capacity to promote the generation of tumor-specific CD4+ Th1 T cells and cytolytic T cells (CTL) and to activate cytocidal activity in macrophages, IFN-γ facilitates development of powerful anti-tumor effector functions mediated by both adaptive and innate immunity (Bach et al., 1997). However, the tumor cells themselves have also been shown to represent a critical cellular target of IFN-γ. Highly immunogenic MCA-induced tumor cells derived from IFN-γ sensitive RAG-2−/− mice are rejected when injected into naive syngeneic immunocompetent recipients (Shankaran et al., 2001; G.P.D., C.M. Koebel, and R.D.S., unpublished data). However, when the IFN-γ sensitivity of these cells is ablated by overexpression of a dominant-negative IFNGR1 mutant, they become poorly immunogenic and form aggressively growing tumors in wild-type mice (Dighe et al., 1994; G.P.D., C.M. Koebel, and R.D.S., unpublished data). Conversely, poorly immunogenic MCA-sarcoma cells derived from IFNGR1−/− mice become highly immunogenic cells and are rejected in immunocompetent mice after ectopic expression of wild-type IFNGR1 and restoration of IFN-γ sensitivity (Kaplan et al., 1998). IFNGR1−/− tumor cells are also rendered highly immunogenic by ectopic expression of IFN-γ-inducible components of the MHC class I antigen processing and presentation pathway (Shankaran et al., 2001; A.T. Bruce and R.D.S., unpublished data), thus revealing that IFN-γ's ability to upregulate tumor immunogenicity is sufficient to explain the effects on tumor detection and elimination in immunocompetent hosts.
One key remaining question is whether type I interferons (IFN-α/β) also participate in cancer immunosurveillance. Longstanding work from Gresser and colleagues has shown that in vivo neutralization of endogenously produced IFN-α/β enhances growth of transplanted tumors in wild-type mice (Gresser and Belardelli, 2002). Moreover, administration of IFN-α/β has positive therapeutic actions on certain types of murine and human cancers (Belardelli et al., 2002). More recent in vitro work has pointed to a role for IFN-α/β in preventing cellular transformation through mechanisms involving enhanced cellular expression of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in cells exposed to type I IFN (Takaoka et al., 2003). Further work is needed to define the precise cellular targets of IFN-α/β in the cancer immunosurveillance process and to determine whether IFN-α/β functions in a manner that is identical to or distinct from IFN-γ.
Cytolytic Capacity
The second critical effector function of cancer immunosurveillance is the immune system's ability to kill tumor cells. Early studies identified perforin (pfp) as a critical cytolytic molecule in the primary host antitumor response. After challenge with MCA, pfp−/− mice formed two to three times more tumors than wild-type mice van den Broek et al. 1996, Smyth et al. 2000a, Smyth et al. 2000b, Street et al. 2001. In addition, 50% (10/20) of aging pfp−/− C57BL/6 mice developed spontaneous disseminated lymphomas as compared to 1/16 wild-type mice (Smyth et al., 2000b). The kinetics of lymphoma development were accelerated in pfp−/− mice also lacking p53 (Smyth et al., 2000b) or β2 microglobulin (Street et al., 2004).
Subsequent studies revealed an important role for the TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) and have underscored the importance of cytotoxicity manifest by innate immunity in immunosurveillance. A member of the TNF superfamily that induces apoptosis through engagement of the TRAIL-R2 (DR5) receptor in mice, TRAIL is expressed constitutively on a subset of liver NK cells and is induced by either IFN-γ or IFN-α/β in monocytes, NK cells, and dendritic cells (Smyth et al., 2003). When injected with low doses of MCA, C57BL/6 mice treated with neutralizing antibodies to TRAIL (Takeda et al., 2002) or lacking the TRAIL gene (Cretney et al., 2002) developed fibrosarcomas at a higher incidence than wild-type controls. Moreover, p53+/− C57BL/6 mice treated with the neutralizing TRAIL-specific antibody developed more spontaneous sarcomas and disseminated lymphomas over a two-year period than control IgG-treated mice (Takeda et al., 2002). Further study is required to identify the specific innate cell subsets that manifest the TRAIL-dependent antitumor effects. Considering that the TRAIL-R2 receptor is upregulated by p53 in response to DNA damage Wu et al. 1997, Wu et al. 1999, TRAIL killing may be a critical link between target cell genotoxic distress and immune-mediated destruction.
Patrolling Transformation: Mechanisms that Adaptive versus Innate Immunity Use to Distinguish Tumor Cells from Normal Cells
The third central question concerns how cells of the immunosurveillance network distinguish nascent transformed or established tumor cells from normal cells. Work over the last decade has begun to reveal the molecular basis of this crucial distinction particularly within the adaptive immune compartment. Specifically, CD4+ and CD8+ αβ T cells recognize tumor antigens in the context of MHC class II and class I proteins, respectively. Since the first human tumor antigen was identified in 1991 (van der Bruggen et al., 1991), many tumor antigens have been cloned and can be segregated into five categories: (1) differentiation antigens, e.g., melanocyte differentiation antigens, Melan-A/MART-1, tyrosinase, and gp-100; (2) mutational antigens, e.g., abnormal forms of p53; (3) overexpressed/amplified antigens, e.g., HER-2/neu; (4) cancer-testis (CT) antigens, e.g., MAGE and NY-ESO-1; and (5) viral antigens, e.g., EBV and HPV Boon and van der Bruggen 1996, Rosenberg 1999, Old 2003. The molecular definition of tumor antigens has revolutionized the field of tumor immunology by providing a firm basis for how the adaptive immune system discriminates between normal and neoplastic cells.
In addition to tumor antigens presented on MHC molecules, transformed cells may overexpress other molecular signposts that can function as recognition targets in the immunosurveillance process. Several studies have pointed to the NKG2D-activating receptor, expressed on NK cells, γδ T cells, and CD8 αβ T cells (Bauer et al., 1999; reviewed in Raulet, 2003), as one important component that is used by both adaptive and innate immune cells to distinguish cancer cells from normal cells. Functional NKG2D receptors complexes consist of the NKG2D ligand binding polypeptide and either the DAP10 or DAP12 signaling polypeptide (Gilfillan et al., 2002). In humans, NKG2D binds to the MHC class I chain-related proteins A and B (MICA/B), as well as the UL16 binding proteins (ULBPs) Cosman et al. 2001, Pende et al. 2002 and the recently discovered lymphocyte effector cell toxicity-activating ligand (Letal) (Conejo-Garcia et al., 2003) (first reported as RAET1E [Radosavljevic et al., 2002] and also termed ULBP4 [Chalupny et al., 2003]). The MICA/B proteins are highly polymorphic, nonclassical MHC cell surface glycoproteins that do not associate with β2m or require TAP1 for expression Groh et al. 1996, Bahram 2000. Interestingly, while MIC expression in normal tissues has only been documented on the gastrointestinal epithelium of the stomach and large intestines, MICA/B proteins are often expressed in primary carcinomas of the lung, kidney, prostate, ovary, colon (Groh et al., 1999) and liver (Jinushi et al., 2003b), as well as in melanomas (Vetter et al., 2002). In addition, ULBPs (Pende et al., 2002) and Letal (Conejo-Garcia et al., 2003) are also frequently expressed on tumor cells. In mice, NKG2D binds to the retinoic acid early transcript 1 (Rae-1) family proteins Rae-1α-ϵ, the minor histocompatibility antigen H60 Diefenbach et al. 2000, Cerwenka et al. 2001, and mouse UL16 binding protein-like transcript (MULT-1) Carayannopoulos et al. 2002, Diefenbach et al. 2003. NKG2D ligand expression has been observed on a wide range of murine tumors (Diefenbach et al., 2000), and ectopic expression of Rae-1, H60, or MULT-1 was sufficient to induce the rejection of several progressively growing, transplantable tumors Cerwenka et al. 2001, Diefenbach et al. 2001, Diefenbach et al. 2003.
It will be important to characterize the regulation of NKG2D ligand expression in both human and murine cells. These molecules are often described as “stress molecules,” but to date no cancer-relevant signaling pathways have been causally linked to their expression. In human cells, MICA/B gene expression has been induced in several nontransformed human cell lines by heat shock at 42°C (Groh et al., 1999), infection with human cytomegalovirus (Groh et al., 2001), or exposure to E. coli (Tieng et al., 2002), although in dendritic cells MICA/B is upregulated by type I interferon (Jinushi et al., 2003a) or M. tuberculosis infection (Das et al., 2001). However, it remains unclear how these conditions overlap the molecular cascades that underlie neoplastic transformation Hahn and Weinberg 2002a, Hahn and Weinberg 2002b. In mice, Rae-1 is upregulated by retinoic acid in F9 cells (Nomura et al., 1994) and is also expressed early in development (Raulet, 2003). In addition, one study assessed the expression of the NKG2D ligands H60 and Rae-1 after topical application of DMBA and TPA (Girardi et al., 2001). While no expression of these molecules was observed by RT-PCR in normal skin, Rae-1 and H60 expression became detectable 24 hr after carcinogen treatment. Strikingly, expression of both molecules was significantly increased in papillomas and carcinomas generated by DMBA/TPA treatment. It is possible that the transformation process itself induces molecules such as the NKG2D ligands so that the genomic upheaval of tumorigenesis is directly translated into enhanced immune recognition. Further study on the immunology of transformation will be necessary to detail when—and how—in the course of tumorigenesis a cancer cell becomes immunogenic.
One aspect of the cancer immunosurveillance process that has been the subject of much controversy is whether the unmanipulated immune system can detect a developing tumor, even one that may express distinctive recognition molecules on its surface or contain tumor-specific antigens. In the past, it was argued that cellular transformation did not provide a sufficient proinflammatory or “danger” signal to alert the immune system to the presence of a developing tumor Matzinger 1994, Pardoll 2003. However, it was recently realized that (1) danger signals, such as uric acid (Shi et al., 2003), may arise from the inherent biology of the tumor itself (Seong and Matzinger, 2004) and (2) induction of proinflammatory responses through the generation of potential Toll-like receptor ligands, such as heat shock proteins Ohashi et al. 2000, Asea et al. 2002, Srivastava 2002, or extracellular matrix derivatives, such as hyaluronic acid (Termeer et al., 2002) or heparan sulfates (Johnson et al., 2002), may share similarities to the events that underlie activation of innate immune responses to microbial pathogens (Janeway, 1989). Importantly, whereas locally controlled inflammation may be involved in initiating responses to tumors, excessive inflammation may facilitate the transformation process Balkwill and Mantovani 2001, Coussens and Werb 2002, Dranoff 2004. It is therefore important to better define how inflammation inhibits or promotes tumor development in vivo.
Immunologic Sculpting of Cancer: When Tumors Escape Immunosurveillance
Originally, cancer immunosurveillance was envisaged as a binary process: the immune system either protected the host from the development or cancer, or it did not (Burnet, 1970). Moreover, the surveillance functions of the immune system were thought to be executed only at the earliest stages of tumorigenesis. However, recent studies have started to explain what happens when tumors develop in immunocompetent hosts, as they do in individuals with cancer, and what has emerged from this is the realization that even when immunosurveillance fails, the relationship between immunity and cancer is far from over.
An appreciation of the complexity of the immune system/tumor interaction is based on work that compared the immunogenicities of tumors derived from immunocompromised versus immunocompetent mice. In one study, 17/17 tumors derived from wild-type 129/SvEv mice and 20/20 tumors derived from immunodeficient RAG-2−/− mice grew progressively when transplanted into RAG-2−/− hosts (Shankaran et al., 2001). Furthermore, all 17 wild-type tumors grew progressively when transplanted into immunocompetent recipients. However, 8/20 tumors from RAG-2−/− mice were rejected when transplanted into wild-type mice. These findings showed that tumors formed in an immunodeficient environment are, as a group, more immunogenic than tumors that develop in immunocompetent hosts. Similarly, MCA-induced sarcomas derived from nude (Svane et al., 1996) or SCID mice (Engel et al., 1996) were rejected more frequently than similar tumors derived from wild-type mice when transplanted into wild-type hosts. Moreover, sarcomas from Jα281−/− mice grew progressively when transplanted into Jα281−/− recipients, but their growth was significantly impaired when transplanted into wild-type mice (Smyth et al., 2000a). In addition, lymphomas from pfp−/− mice grew avidly when transplanted into pfp−/− recipients, but most were rejected when transplanted into wild-type mice (Street et al., 2002).
Together, the functional demonstration that immunity shapes tumor immunogenicity has laid the foundation for the development of the cancer immunoediting hypothesis. This concept not only incorporates the original notion of cancer immunosurveillance but also recognizes that even after escaping immunosurveillance, a tumor's immunogenic phenotype is continuously shaped by the immunological forces in its environment. In trying to understand how tumors may ultimately be sculpted by immunity, we propose that a tumor that has breached the elimination phase of the immunoediting process may experience two subsequent phases in its interactions with the host's immune system: equilibrium, followed by escape Dunn et al. 2002, Dunn et al. 2004.
The Equilibrium Phase of Cancer Immunoediting
Based on the experimental systems described above, cancer immunosurveillance—i.e., the elimination phase of the cancer immunoediting process—can eradicate a significant percentage of transformed cells. However, some tumor cells may withstand the formidable pressure exerted by cancer immunosurveillance's arsenal. Therefore, we envision that there exists a period of latency extending from the end of the elimination phase to the beginning of the escape phase and the emergence of clinically detectable malignant disease. This potentially protracted period in the course of the immune system/tumor interaction that probably occurs prior to the detection of clinically apparent tumors constitutes the equilibrium phase. The events that occur in the equilibrium phase of cancer immunoediting are likely quite similar to those previously envisaged to occur in a process termed tumor dormancy Wheelock et al. 1981, Uhr et al. 1991. In both cases, while the immune system initially constrains the growth of heterogeneous tumors composed of unstable and rapidly mutating cells, it may approach an asymptote that Darwin could have predicted; although many of the original tumor cells are destroyed, new variants arise carrying more mutations that provide them with increased resistance to immune attack. Ultimately, the dynamic interaction between immunity and cancer in the equilibrium phase produces new populations of tumor cells vetted for survival in the immunocompetent host.
The tumor substrate on which immune cells continuously act can contain cancer cells that harbor thousands of mutations Loeb 1991, Loeb et al. 2003. The enormous plasticity of the cancer cell genome is thought to arise from several types of genetic instability, including nucleotide-excision repair instability, microsatellite instability, and chromosomal instability (Lengauer et al., 1998), the latter of which may induce gains or losses of whole chromosomes. Thus, the tumor cell's constant genomic metamorphosis may eventually give rise to new phenotypes that display reduced immunogenicity. Importantly, while the genesis of variation in tumor cell immunogenicity may be stochastic, the tumor that ultimately emerges from the equilibrium phase is instructively shaped by the repertoire of immune “editors” in its local environment and is thus conditioned to progress into the escape phase of the immunoediting process.
A clinical scenario that likely demonstrates the existence of the equilibrium phase in humans is the transmission of cancer from organ transplant donors to recipients. In these situations, transplanted organs appear grossly cancer free at harvest. While some organ donors are subsequently found to harbor disease in other anatomic sites, other transplant donors either have no clinical history of cancer or have been in durable remission from cancer prior to transplantation. One recent study reported the occurrence of metastatic melanoma 1–2 years posttransplant in two allograft recipients who had each received kidneys from the same donor (MacKie et al., 2003). Upon subsequent investigation, it was found that the donor had been treated for primary melanoma 16 years before her death, but was considered tumor free at the time of organ donation. This study, together with others in the literature Penn 1991, Penn 1996, Elder et al. 1997, Suranyi et al. 1998, suggests that the pharmacologic suppression of the immune systems of these transplant recipients facilitated the rapid and progressive outgrowth of occult tumors that were maintained in the equilibrium phase by the donor's intact immune system.
We stress here that the cancer immunoediting process may not always represent the linear progression of a tumor from the elimination phase through the equilibrium phase and into the final escape phase of clinical detection. Indeed, this process may be terminated in the elimination phase if the cancer immunosurveillance process is successful at destroying a developing tumor. Likewise, we envision three possible outcomes for a tumor that has entered the latent period of equilibrium: (1) eventual elimination by the immune system, (2) permanent maintenance in the equilibrium phase by the cellular and molecular controls of immunity, or (3) escape from immune pressure and transit to the final escape phase of the immunoediting process. Importantly, the first two phases of the cancer immunoediting process represent potential goals for immunotherapy: tumor elimination or the durable control of cancer in equilibrium. Currently, the equilibrium phase is the most hypothetical of the three phases, and more data are needed to prove its existence. Thus, it is critical to establish new tumor models that will stringently test for the existence of the equilibrium phase during primary tumor development and subsequently define the effects of experimentally controlled variable periods of equilibrium on the immunogenicities of established cancers in immunocompetent hosts.
The Escape Phase of Cancer Immunoediting
Edited tumor cells surviving the equilibrium phase of the cancer immunoediting process enter the escape phase where tumor growth proceeds unrestrained by immune pressure. To become clinically detectable in the immunocompetent host, cancer cells must circumvent both innate and adaptive immunologic defenses. The degree to which a tumor's immunogenicity is shaped by its interaction with the host immune system may be determined by the identities of the immune editors operative during the equilibrium phase. It is possible that tumor escape from each different tissue site of origin may be mechanistically distinct. It therefore follows that metastatic lesions may experience the most significant immunologic sculpting—hewn by immune pressure from both primary tissue sites of origin as well as distant sites of manifestation.
Many studies have documented that tumor escape can be a direct consequence of alterations occurring in edited tumor targets themselves. For example, some tumor cells develop direct or indirect lesions in antigen processing and presentation pathways that facilitate evasion from adaptive immune recognition. Analysis of human tumor specimens has shown that many display losses of HLA class I proteins Algarra et al. 2000, Marincola et al. 2000. In addition, other components of this pathway, including TAP1 and the immunoproteasome subunits LMP2 and LMP7, are frequently deficient in human tumors (Seliger et al., 2000). Moreover, other lesions were identified that indirectly lead to antigen processing or presentation defects. In one study, 4/17 (25%) human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines were found to be unresponsive to IFN-γ due to the absence or abnormal function of components of the IFN-γ receptor signaling pathway (Kaplan et al., 1998). Tumor cells expressing these lesions failed to upregulate MHC class I pathway activity when exposed to IFN-γ. Similar lesions were found in other studies that reported deficiencies of IFN receptor signaling pathway components in prostate cancer (G.P.D. and R.D.S., unpublished data) and melanoma (Wong et al., 1997).
Tumor escape has also been observed as one outcome of specific immunotherapeutic approaches. In one study, ten patients harboring metastatic melanoma received adoptively transferred T cells specific to the tumor antigens MART-1/MelanA or gp100 with adjuvant IL-2 therapy (Yee et al., 2002). Although 8/10 patients experienced stable, minor, or mixed clinical responses, 3/5 patients studied exhibited specific loss of the tumor antigen that was targeted during treatment. Similar findings were made in two other melanoma vaccine trials in which multiple tumors from individual patients undergoing vaccination with peptides from gp-100, MART-1, and tyrosinase lost expression of either the targeted melanoma antigens or all HLA molecules on which the antigens were presented Jager et al. 1997, Khong et al. 2004. These studies clearly show that tumors may evade both naturally occurring or therapeutically induced immune responses and suggest that at least some of the dynamics underlying the cancer immunoediting process in the unmanipulated host are also at work when the three phases of cancer immunoediting are initiated therapeutically.
Other work has shown that inhibition of the protective functions of the immune system may also facilitate tumor escape. In this scenario, immunologically sculpted tumor cell variants may overproduce immunosuppressive cytokines, such as TGF-β or IL-10 (Khong and Restifo, 2002), or inhibit immune responses through other mechanisms. One study documented that soluble forms of the MIC NKG2D ligands, secreted by certain human tumors, downregulated the NKG2D receptor on immune effector cells and attenuated lymphocyte-mediated cytotoxicity (Groh et al., 2002). Other studies demonstrated that some tumor cells overproduce inhibitors of T cell responses, such as galectin-1 (Rubinstein et al., 2004) and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) (Uyttenhove et al., 2003). Finally, other developing tumors suppress induction of proinflammatory danger signals through mechanisms involving activated STAT3, leading to impaired dendritic cell maturation that, in turn, provides the developing tumor with a potential mechanism to escape immune detection (Wang et al., 2003). Thus, a tumor may directly inhibit antitumor immune responses by multiple mechanisms.
Significant interest has recently focused on the premise that tumors may also facilitate the generation, activation, or function of immunosuppressive T cell populations (Terabe and Berzofsky, 2004), such as IL-13-producing NKT cells (Terabe et al., 2000) or CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells (T regs). The latter have attracted considerable attention due to their involvement in controlling both pathologic and protective immune responses. Originally identified as a CD4+ T cell subset (comprising 5%–10% of all peripheral T cells) constitutively expressing CD25 that controls the behavior of autoreactive T cells in vivo and suppresses T cell responses in vitro Sakaguchi et al. 1995, Read et al. 1998, Thornton and Shevach 1998, CD4+CD25+ Tregs were subsequently suggested to play important roles in inhibiting naturally occurring and therapeutically induced protective immune responses against tumors. Two studies showed that CD4+CD25+ Tregs are often responsible for the failure of naive murine hosts to eliminate transplanted tumors Onizuka et al. 1999, Shimizu et al. 1999. Collectively, these studies documented that depletion of CD4+CD25+ Tregs by using an anti-CD25 mAb enabled mice to reject tumors that grew progressively in control mice.
These observations have stimulated interest in defining the tumor antigens recognized by Tregs and in determining whether an inhibitory T cell subset operates similarly in human cancer patients. By using SEREX analysis (Sahin et al., 1995), an expression cloning technique wherein IgG class antibodies present in the sera of tumor bearing hosts are used to identify tumor antigens, a set of normal, nonmutated proteins, including Dna J-like 2, were identified as tumor antigens. When challenged intravenously with fibrosarcoma cells, naive mice preimmunized with a subset of these SEREX-defined antigens displayed a remarkable enhancement of pulmonary metastases compared to control mice (Nishikawa et al., 2003). This effect was inhibited if Dna J-like 2-immunized mice were first depleted of CD25+ cells. Moreover, permissiveness for tumor growth could be transferred to naive mice by passive transfer of CD4+CD25+ T cells derived from Dna J-like 2-immunized hosts. More striking were the subsequent observations that (1) Dna J-like 2-immunized mice developed MCA-induced primary tumors more rapidly and with greater frequency compared to control mice and (2) this effect was abrogated if the immunized mice were pretreated with a depleting CD25-specific mAb (H. Nishikawa, T. Kato, L.J.O., and H. Shiku, unpublished data). Together, these results suggest that CD4+CD25+ Tregs play an important role in suppressing protective immune responses against both primary and transplanted tumors.
Recent studies have suggested that Tregs can also be detected in a variety of human cancers. Specifically, individuals with nonsmall cell lung cancer or cancers of the ovary (Woo et al., 2001), breast, or pancreas (Liyanage et al., 2002) all displayed elevated levels of CD4+CD25+ Tregs. Moreover, another study has identified the CT antigen LAGE-1 as the first human tumor antigen specifically recognized by Tregs (Wang et al., 2004). These studies not only complement those in animal models but also point to the probable clinical relevance of regulatory T cell activity in human cancer. Further studies will be necessary to characterize the phenotypes of Tregs, elucidate the molecular basis of their suppressive functions and identify more fully their physiologic ligands.
Conclusion
In his writings about cancer immunosurveillance, Lewis Thomas reflected that, “It seemed to me then, and still does, that some such built-in immunologic mechanism ought to exist for natural defense against cancer” (Thomas, 1982). In this review, we have summarized the functional evidence showing that such immunologic defenses do, in fact, exist in the immunocompetent host and have discussed the nature of the known cellular and molecular components that inhibit tumor development. Furthermore, we have pointed out several remaining critical questions whose answers will ultimately frame a full understanding of the host-protective cancer immunosurveillance network. We have also discussed the studies demonstrating that cancer immunosurveillance is not the whole story, thus prompting the development of the cancer immunoediting hypothesis—i.e., the acknowledgment that immunity's powers to protect the host from cancer may also drive the generation of tumors better suited to survive in an immunologically intact environment. The most significant clinical implication of this hypothesis is that most, if not all, tumors that develop in humans may have undergone immunologic sculpting as a result of a cancer immunoediting process, with the most dramatic consequences of the process probably occurring before the tumor is clinically detectable. Ultimately, if the cancer immunoediting process indeed emerges as one of the leitmotifs of cancer progression, then an improved understanding of the immunobiology of cancer immunoediting and a molecular definition of how tumors are shaped by this process will undoubtedly bring us closer to tumor immunology's capstone: the use of immunotherapy to control and/or eradicate neoplastic disease in the human cancer patient.

Aberrant gene function and altered patterns of gene expression are key features of cancer. Growing evidence shows that acquired epigenetic abnormalities participate with genetic alterations to cause this dysregulation. Here, we review recent advances in understanding how epigenetic alterations participate in the earliest stages of neoplasia, including stem/precursor cell contributions, and discuss the growing implications of these advances for strategies to control cancer.
For decades, scientists have been engaged in dissecting the origins of human cancer, and the relative roles of genetic versus epigenetic abnormalities have been hotly debated. An explosion of data indicating the importance of epigenetic processes, especially those resulting in the silencing of key regulatory genes, has led to the realization that genetics and epigenetics cooperate at all stages of cancer development. Recent advances include the understanding that silencing is part of global epigenomic alterations in cancer, that pathways relevant to stem cell growth and differentiation become altered, and the approval of three drugs that target these defects in cancer patients.

Gene Silencing and Cancer
Epigenetics is defined as heritable changes in gene expression that are not accompanied by changes in DNA sequence. Gene silencing at the level of chromatin is necessary for the life of eukaryotic organisms and is particularly important in orchestrating key biological processes, including differentiation, imprinting, and silencing of large chromosomal domains such as the X chromosome, over the life span of female mammals. In many species, silencing can be initiated and maintained solely by processes involving the covalent modifications of histones and other chromatin components. Vertebrates, however, have taken advantage of the heritability of DNA cytosine methylation patterns to add another layer of control to these processes.

Like most biological processes, silencing can become dysregulated, resulting in the development of disease states. It can also result in the acquired inactivation of genes during normal aging. A key property of silencing is that it can spread over genomic regions in a progressive way, as perhaps best exemplified by position-effect variegation in Drosophila. It seems to involve the cooperation of multiple processes, including noncoding RNAs, covalent modifications of chromatin, physical alterations in nucleosomal positioning, and DNA methylation, among others.

It must be appreciated, as we will outline, that epigenetic abnormalities in cancer comprise a multitude of aberrations in virtually every component of chromatin involved in packaging the human genome. Since epigenetic silencing processes are mitotically heritable, they can play the same roles and undergo the same selective processes as genetic alterations in the development of a cancer. A principal tenet of Darwin's hypotheses for the evolution of species is that most germline mutations are deleterious, or of no functional significance; mutations give rise to a specific advantage selected for in an evolving population. These same selective concepts apply for epigenetic events, which can occur at a much more increased rate compared to mutations in somatic cells. Alterations in gene expression induced by epigenetic events, which give rise to a cellular growth advantage, are therefore selected for in the host organ, resulting in the progressive uncontrolled growth of the tumor. This does not mean that all silenced genes play direct roles, since it is becoming clear, as we will discuss later, that whole groups of genes may be inactivated as part of an abnormal “program.” Epigenetic changes can collaborate with genetic changes to cause the evolution of a cancer because they are mitotically heritable. The high degree of mitotic stability of silencing coupled with the progressive nature by which it is achieved makes pathological silencing of growth controlling and other genes an essential part of the development of a human cancer.

The Importance of Chromatin Remodeling
Much is now known about the importance of promoter cytosine methylation in CpG islands and gene silencing, and it has been established beyond doubt that such methylation is intimately involved in cancer development. As discussed later, many hundreds of genes may be inactivated in a single cancer by promoter methylation. In general, methylated CpG islands are not capable of the initiation of transcription unless the methylation signal can be overridden by alterations in factors that modulate chromatin, such as removal of methylated cytosine binding proteins (Bakker et al., 2002) or the deacetylase, SIRT1 (Pruitt et al., 2006).

The driving force in DNA methylation research, particularly as it relates to cancer, has, until now, been particularly focused on CpG island promoter methylation. However, it remains true that about 40% of human genes do not contain bona fide CpG islands in their promoters (Takai and Jones, 2002). The reason for the focus on islands is because of the demonstrable ability of CpG-island promoter methylation to permanently silence genes both physiologically and pathologically in mammalian cells. The role of methylation in non-CpG island promoters has been largely overlooked because the mechanistic links have not been so well demonstrated. Recent work has shown strong correlations between tissue-specific expression and methylation of non-CpG islands, including, for example, the maspin gene (Futscher et al., 2002). Maspin has a CpG rich promoter that does not meet established criteria for a CpG island (Takai and Jones, 2002). There are other examples of genes, such as the MAGE gene family, that are commonly upregulated by epigenetic therapy in which the promoters do not satisfy recognized criteria for “islandness.” Indeed, recent DNA methylation profiling of human chromosomes 6, 20, and 22 has shown that 17% of 873 analyzed genes are differentially methylated and that about a third of these show inverse correlations between methylation and transcription (Eckhardt et al., 2006). While it has not been rigorously established that cytosine methylation in such promoters causally blocks transcription, it is also true that this possibility has not been excluded. There is clearly room for more work on the CpG poor genes in which cytosine methylation could also play a role in normal development as well as in cancer.

The importance of DNA methylation in cancer has been established (Jones and Baylin, 2002, Jones and Laird, 1999), and the focus in the field is changing to include the mechanisms by which other chromatin modifications play a role in cancer development (Figure 1). Foremost among these are the covalent modifications of histones that can control gene activity. For example, histone deacetylation and methylation of specific lysine residues such as lysine 9 in histone H3 or lysine 27 in histone H3 clearly participate in the silencing of genes (Jenuwein, 2006; see also the Review by B. Li et al., page 707 in this issue).
A key link between these covalent histone modifications and DNA methylation was established by the pioneering experiments of Nan et al. (1998) and Jones et al. (1998) who showed that cytosine methylation could attract methylated DNA binding proteins and histone deacetylases to methylated CpG islands during chromatin compaction and gene silencing. More recently, however, the link between covalent histone modifications and nucleosomal remodeling is increasingly being explored. Zhang et al. (1999) showed that DNA methylation binding protein (MBD2) interacts with the nucleosomal remodeling complex (NuRD) and directs the complex to methylate DNA. Harikrishnan et al. (2005) showed that Brahma (Brm), which is a catalytic component of the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex, associates with the methylated DNA binding protein MeCP2. These experiments provide a potential link between DNA methylation and chromatin silencing. Very recent studies have shown that covalent modifications of histones couple these processes with chromatin remodeling by ATP-dependent remodeling machines (Li et al., 2006, Wysocka et al., 2006). This has led to the realization that the three processes of DNA cytosine methylation, histone modification, and nucleosomal remodeling are intimately linked and that alterations in these processes result in the permanent silencing of cancer-relevant genes (Figure 1).

The fact that nucleosomal remodeling is a key component to the epigenetic silencing in cancer has been known for some time. It has been directly shown that mutations in the SWI/SNF complex play causative roles in the development of certain kinds of human cancer. Mutations in the SNF5 gene stimulate cell-cycle progression and cooperate with p53 loss in oncogenic transformation, and they are also associated with inactivation of the p21 and p16 pathways (Chai et al., 2005, Roberts and Orkin, 2004). Once again, these changes may in fact be quite extensive in the epigenome.

Global Changes in the Cancer Epigenome
The occurrence of localized changes in chromatin structure at transcriptional start sites has been well appreciated; however, it is now emerging that the alterations are genome wide. Indeed, early studies pointed to an overall decrease in the 5-methylcytosine content of cancer genomes (Feinberg and Tycko, 2004, Riggs and Jones, 1983). The hypermethylation consistently observed in CpG islands therefore represents a change in 5-methylcytosine distribution across the genome rather than an overall increase in the total amount of methylation. Interestingly, it has recently been found that large stretches of DNA can become abnormally methylated in cancer (Frigola et al., 2006).

The changes in CpG-island methylation in single tumors can involve a group of loci and has been hypothesized to constitute a distinct phenotype, first proposed by Toyota et al. (1999) as the “CpG island methylator phenotype” or CIMP. The existence of CIMP has been challenged (Yamashita et al., 2003), but recent studies by Weisenberger et al. (2006) showing that a subset of CpG islands is coordinately methylated in tumors argues, in our opinion, for the reality of such a phenotype. As will be discussed later, it is intriguing that many of these CIMP loci are targets for polycomb group proteins (Widschwendter et al., 2007).

Surprising results have also been obtained with respect to genome-wide changes in histone modifications. Loss of acetylation at lysine 16 and trimethylation at lysine 20 of histone H4 is a common hallmark of human cancer (Fraga et al., 2005), and global histone modification patterns predict the risk of prostate cancer recurrence (Seligson et al., 2005). Other evidence for global changes being involved in carcinogenesis come from studies in the polycomb group gene family, which is highly conserved throughout evolution (Valk-Lingbeek et al., 2004). The polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2) is involved in the initiation of silencing and contains histone methyltransferases that can methylate histone H3 lysine 9 and 27, which are marks of silenced chromatin. The significance of these findings will be discussed later. The polycomb gene BMI1, a component of PRC1, is overexpressed in several human cancers so that it might be expected that aberrations in this system would give rise to global alterations in gene silencing in cancer (Valk-Lingbeek et al., 2004).

It is well known that certain transcription factors such as c-Myc do not bind to their recognition sequences in the methylated condition, suggesting that CpG methylation may affect the ability of Myc to bind to multiple sites within the genome. Given that Myc can influence chromatin structure (Knoepfler et al., 2006), it is certainly plausible that inappropriate methylation of its recognition sites could have profound implications on the cancer epigenome. Perhaps more attention should be paid in the future to methylation of such genomic regions.

Given the linkage between processes that regulate epigenetic silencing, it should not be surprising that such changes are observed on a genome-wide scale (Figure 1). For example, DNA methylation and histone acetylation are known to be intimately linked, so that global hypomethylation might be expected to lead to global alterations in the level of histone acetylation and vice versa. These rapidly emerging data strongly indicate that the entire epigenome is fundamentally disturbed in cancer development. While the focus on research until recently has been on silencing, more attention is now being paid to the possibility that these genome-wide changes in the structure of the epigenome can lead to the genomic instability, that is a hallmark of cancer (Cadieux et al., 2006).

Aberrant Gene Silencing during Early Neoplastic Progression
A key to understanding the contributions of aberrant epigenetic gene silencing to cancer has been to consider these in the context of their timing in cancer progression just as has been done for genetic changes. Recent reviews (Baylin and Ohm, 2006, Feinberg et al., 2006) have emphasized that epigenetic abnormalities might play a seminal role in the earliest steps in cancer initiation. Abnormal gene imprinting and/or silencing may help push the early aberrant clonal expansion of cells, providing a “substrate” for risk of subsequent genetic and epigenetic alterations that further foster tumor progression (Baylin and Ohm, 2006, Feinberg et al., 2006). This concept is shown for colon cancer in Figure 2, in which risk factors for common cancers such as aging (Sharpless and DePinho, 2005) and inflammation (Coussens and Werb, 2002, Lu et al., 2006, Nelson et al., 2004) are depicted as causing such expansions in either normal colon epithelial stem cells or precursor cells derived from them. A series of genes, all documented to exhibit DNA hypermethylation in preinvasive stages of colon and other cancers, but which are rarely mutated in such cancers, are shown and referred to as “epigenetic gatekeepers.” In other words, the normal epigenetic modulation of these genes allows them to prevent stem/precursor cells from becoming immortalized and acquiring infinite cell renewal capacity during periods of chronic stresses and renewal pressures on cell systems. It also allows these genes to be activated, as needed, when stem/precursor cells differentiate. The inappropriate silencing of these genes blocks their activation and allows for abnormal survival and clonal expansion and prevents differentiation. Depicted also are genes such as in APC or β-catenin involved as genetic gatekeepers for colon cancer, since mutations foster abnormal activation of the developmental Wnt pathway, which plays a canonical role in driving colon tumorigenesis throughout the life history of these tumors. In the paradigm shown, broaching of the epigenetic gatekeeper steps allows cell expansion and time for the genetic gatekeeper mutations to appear and even to undergo selection because the cells are now “addicted” to Wnt pathway activation (Baylin and Ohm, 2006).
Epigenetic silencing of genes p16, SFRPs, GATA-4 and -5, and APC (red X) in stem/precursor cells of adult cell-renewal systems may serve to abnormally lock these cells into stem-like states that foster abnormal clonal expansion. These genes are termed “epigenetic gatekeepers” because their normal epigenetic pattern of expression should allow them to be activated during stem/precursor cell differentiation as needed to properly control adult cell renewal. The repertoire of abnormal gene silencing then allows abnormal survival of the cells in the setting of chronic stress, such as inflammation (see Figure 3). The resulting preinvasive stem cells become “addicted” to the survival pathways involved so that selection for mutations in genetic gatekeeper genes provide an even stronger stimulus for further tumor progression. The bulk of the resulting tumor is composed of a subpopulation of cancer stem cells and neoplastic progeny.
How might loss of function for the epigenetic gatekeeper genes actually foster early abnormal clonal expansion? As shown in Figure 2, Wnt pathway activation may be a striking example where epigenetic events can play important roles. First, APC, the classically mutated genetic gatekeeper gene in colon cancer leading to Wnt pathway activation (Kinzler and Vogelstein, 1996), can be inactivated in sporadic tumors both by such mutations, or, occasionally, epigenetic gene silencing (Esteller et al., 2000) (Figure 2). Also, methylation on one allele can also serve as a “second hit” for gene inactivation when paired with mutations on the opposite allele (Esteller et al., 2001). Second, four members of a family of genes, the SFRPs, which encode proteins that antagonize the action of the Wnt ligand at the cell membrane, can be hypermethylated simultaneously in the majority of preinvasive lesions for colon cancer (Suzuki et al., 2004). This silencing can foster increased Wnt pathway signaling, which may precede and addict cells toward evolving later mutations in the downstream pathway genes, APC or β-catenin, that further activate Wnt signaling to foster colon tumorigenesis (Baylin and Ohm, 2006).

The tumor suppressor gene, p16ink4A, is one of the most common, and earliest, epigenetically mediated losses of tumor suppressor function events in human cancer. This silencing begins in subsets of preinvasive stages of breast, colon, lung, and other cancers (Belinsky et al., 1998, McDermott et al., 2006, Reynolds et al., 2006). Recent studies of knockout mice have revealed that germline loss of this gene increases stem cell life span (Janzen et al., 2006, Krishnamurthy et al., 2006, Molofsky et al., 2006), consistent with a proposed role in tumorigenesis for facilitating early abnormal clonal expansion of cells at risk for cancer. Indeed, loss of this gene is permissive for allowing such expanding cells to develop genomic instability (Foster et al., 1998, Kiyono et al., 1998) and further epigenetic gene-silencing events (Reynolds et al., 2006).

The GATA-4 and -5 transcription factor genes are important for both embryonic gastrointestinal epithelial development and for maturation in adults (Gao et al., 1998, Laverriere et al., 1994, Molkentin et al., 1997) and are epigenetically silenced in virtually half of all of the preinvasive and invasive lesions for colon cancer (Akiyama et al., 2003). This can then impede differentiation and foster precursor cell expansion.

Finally, an intriguing abnormal survival circuit regulated by epigenetic gene silencing concerns upregulation of the survival protein, SIRT1, via loss of the transcription factor HIC1, which is DNA hypermethylated in early preinvasive lesions for colon tumorigenesis and many other common cancers (Baylin and Ohm, 2006). HIC1, a transcriptional repressor complexed with SIRT1, can downmodulate SIRT1 promoter activity (Chen et al., 2005). The loss of HIC1 function potentially sets off a network of survival events, which are detailed later below (Figure 3).
Cancer Gene Silencing Versus Genetic Mutations
How does loss of function of cancer genes via epigenetic silencing resemble, or differ from, genetically mediated losses of gene function? Gene mutations in a single tumor are seldom multiple in a given cell pathway, since selection for one hit appears sufficient to produce full pathway disruption (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000). Certainly, this can sometimes also be the case for gene silencing as found for classic tumor suppressor genes. Thus, in the cyclin D-Rb pathway, silencing of p16 does not appear in tumors in which the Rb gene is mutated, since both events powerfully disrupt cell-cycle control (Jones and Baylin, 2002). Similarly, mutations in the VHL gene, seminal for renal cancer pathogenesis, occur in 60% of tumors, while the gene is DNA hypermethylated in another ∼20% (Jones and Baylin, 2002). Also, mutations and epigenetic silencing of E-cadherin are mutually exclusive in the lobular and ductal forms of breast cancer, respectively (Graff et al., 1995).

Despite the above similarities between genetic and epigenetic gene loss of function in cancer, there is an important emerging theme that, unlike for mutations, multiple epigenetic events may frequently affect a single-cell pathway (Figure 3). These changes may function as networks in which multiple genes are not only affected within a pathway but can generate alterations of other key signaling pathways and even involve epigenetic events that cause other epigenetic events. Thus, these epigenetic abnormalities form a more nuanced, integrated disruption of pathways than do gene mutations to foster tumorigenesis (Figure 3). A first example is the previously mentioned silencing of the four SFRP genes and their interactions with Wnt pathway gene mutations. A second is the silencing of p16ink4A, which, in addition to disrupting the cyclin D-Rb cell-cycle control pathway, may foster recruitment of silencing complexes through other means and cause abnormal DNA methylation to the promoter of a HOX gene (Reynolds et al., 2006) (Figure 3). It may be that this loss of transcriptional activation of the downstream genes renders them susceptible to heritable silencing through adoption of the types of repressive promoter chromatin, which will be revisited below.

Perhaps one of the most complex series of events for networks of epigenetic abnormalities in cancers involves the loss of HIC1 function and the resultant potential survival events (Figure 2). As recently reviewed (Baylin and Ohm, 2006), the increases in SIRT1 may prolong cell survival through multiple mechanisms, including downmodulation of p53 function through deacetylation of this target protein. In addition, through mechanisms including deacetylation of the histone residue, H4K16, the yeast SIRT1 ortholog, Sir2, is an important participant in gene silencing (Guarente, 2000, Kimura et al., 2002, Suka et al., 2002). It appears that this is also the case in humans, including those genes that are DNA hypermethylated and silenced in cancer (Pruitt et al., 2006). Thus, increases in SIRT1 appear important for silencing of genes including the SFRPs, where the loss can upregulate the Wnt pathway, again facilitating cell survival in tumors such as colon (Figure 2). Finally, HIC1 itself has been shown to normally sequester, in the nucleus, transcription factors that drive the Wnt pathway. Thus, loss can free these for increased Wnt pathway function (Valenta et al., 2006).

It is then apparent that from the earliest stages of neoplastic development, epigenetic changes can, just as for gene mutations, perturb multiple key pathways in ways that foster cancer risk and evolution. As more and more cancer genes are discovered, which are functionally altered via epigenetic mechanisms, these pathways, and the links between them, will undoubtedly be even further appreciated.

The “Cancer Stem Cell” Hypothesis
Much of the recent work, including information derived from random screens to discover DNA hypermethylated cancer genes and the deciphering of networks of silenced genes, indicate that hundreds of epigenetically silenced genes possibly exist even in individual tumors. While it is conceivable that selection for stochastic events could account for this, it seems unlikely that all of the changes observed arise in such a random fashion and then come to dominate the tumor clone through selective advantage. Perhaps, just as multiple mutations arising in tumors secondary to central defects in genetic control programs, such as mismatch repair deficiency states, are not all directly important for tumor progression, the existence of multiple epigenetically silenced genes might reflect programs of epigenetic control abnormalities. Some might even be derived from genetic alterations that dictate abnormal chromatin regulation.

What could account for these early epigenetic silencing events and the many genes that appear to be involved, which may be key steps in the earliest phases of neoplastic evolution? As has been reviewed recently (Baylin and Ohm, 2006), one possibility concerns a role for the control of expression of groups of genes at the chromatin level, which is integral to the maintenance of cells in a stem cell state. The contribution of a stem cell state is integral to current thinking in the cancer biology field relative to an old, but still vital concept, that each patient's tumor is a heterogeneous population of cells, some of which have more tumorigenic and metastatic potential than others (Al-Hajj et al., 2003). In recent years, this has evolved into the concept of the “cancer stem cell” that is believed to constitute the population that is ultimately responsible for perpetuating the tumor. These cells have many properties common to normal stem cells, but their exact origins remain controversial (Bjerkvig et al., 2005). Currently, most researchers seem to favor the view that a range of cells in normal cell renewing systems, from the ultimate stem cells to a subsequent series of precursor and progenitor cells, have the potential to constitute the focal transformation point for individual cancers. This could, in fact, explain the existence of many subtypes of major tumor types such as lung and breast cancers.

In the above context, if epigenetic cancer gene silencing might begin in a cancer stem cell, this would dictate that many such changes constitute early events in tumor progression and might have their molecular origins tied to stem/precursor cell population characteristics. We have discussed, in this review, a body of solid evidence for the former point and exciting concepts are emerging for the latter. We have mentioned earlier that long-term silencing of genes in embryonic stem (ES) cells is under control of the polycomb complexes of proteins (PcG), which act in concert for long-term maintenance of transcriptional repression. The PcG complex, PRC2, is involved in the initiation of silencing and contains EZH2, the histone methyltransferase that places the histone methylation modification, HeK27me (Orlando, 2003, Pirrotta and Gross, 2005, Ringrose and Paro, 2004; see also the Review by B. Schuettengruber et al., page 735 in this issue). In turn, this mark can attract the PRC1 complexes that maintain the silencing (Orlando, 2003, Pirrotta and Gross, 2005, Ringrose and Paro, 2004). The PRC1 complexes contain chromo domain proteins such as the CBX family (Bernstein et al., 2006b) that recognize the HeK27me mark, and the key stem cell protein Bmi1, which can silence the p16 gene (discussed earlier as a key gene epigenetically silenced early in cancers [Valk-Lingbeek et al., 2004, Varambally et al., 2002]). Steady-state levels of EZH2, Bmi1, and other PcG complex members are increased in cancer (Bracken et al., 2003, Varambally et al., 2002). Enrichment of EZH2 and the H3K27me mark is a property of the promoters of DNA hypermethylated and silenced genes (McGarvey et al., 2006), as is the sirtuin deactylase SIRT1 (Pruitt et al., 2006), which has been associated with PRC2 complexes found in stem and cancer cells (Kuzmichev et al., 2005).

Thus, dysregulation of the PcG system potentially links cancer formation to stem cell biology (Valk-Lingbeek et al., 2004). A large group of genes is marked by PcG control in ES cells (Boyer et al., 2006, Lee et al., 2006), as well as in other more committed stem/precursor cells (Bracken et al., 2006; see also the Review by M.A. Surani et al., page 747 in this issue). This marking appears to hold these genes at a transcription level required by the ES cell state until needed for up- or downregulation of the genes in more committed progeny (Bernstein et al., 2006a, Bracken et al., 2006). The PcG system has been incriminated in targeting DNA methylation for locking in gene silencing (Vire et al., 2006). If borne out in subsequent studies, it is appealing to consider that this targeting of silencing, in concert with other histone modifications such as H3K9 methylation (Tamaru and Selker, 2003), may be a link between stem cell biology, promoter DNA hypermethylation, and gene silencing in cancer. If, in mature cell renewal populations, survival responses to chronic inflammation and aging involve stem/precursor cells, then the set of PcG marked genes may render genes vulnerable to abnormal DNA methylation. Indeed, very recent findings have shown that stem cell PcG targets are 20-fold more likely to have cancer-specific promoter methylation than nontargets, supporting a stem cell origin for cancer (J.E. Ohm et al., submitted; Widschwendter et al., 2007, Schlesinger et al., 2007). The resultant tight heritable gene silencing for the genes we have been discussing may then abnormally hold cells in stem/precursor cell states, allowing them to participate in early steps in neoplastic progression.

The Potential of Epigenetic Therapeutics
The fact that epigenetic changes are so prevalent in cancers and play a causative role in their biologies has led to the development of an entirely new therapeutic approach in which the goal is to reverse gene silencing. It is 30 years since the first description of the remarkable effects of azanucleoside drugs on the differentiated state of cells (Constantinides et al., 1977). It is now clear that these compounds function as inhibitors of the DNA methyltransferase enzymes (Santi et al., 1983). Nevertheless, it has taken three decades for the drugs to be approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Other nucleoside inhibitors of DNA methylation, including 5-fluoro-2′-deoxycytidine (Jones and Taylor, 1980) and zebularine (Cheng et al., 2004), are at an earlier stage of development.

Given that nucleosides require incorporation into DNA in order to be fully effective, there have been several attempts to find other inhibitors of DNA methylation that might act without incorporation into DNA. Although procainamide (Cornacchia et al., 1988) and tea polyphenols (Fang et al., 2003) have been reported to be DNA methylation inhibitors, they are, at best, weak inhibitors in living cells (Chuang et al., 2005), and research to discover other inhibitors remains a high priority. The recent description of the drug RG101 is a promising development of a lead compound that might be effective as a DNA methylation inhibitor (Brueckner et al., 2005).

The demonstration that histone deacetylase inhibitors have antitumor potential (Marks et al., 2001, Minucci and Pelicci, 2006) has led to the development of a series of inhibitors. The first of these, SAHA, has just been approved by the FDA for the treatment of T cell cutaneous lymphoma, and several drug companies are actively pursuing new histone deacetylase inhibitors (Bolden et al., 2006).

The histone methyltransferases represent another valid target for the discovery of new drugs that can reactivate silenced genes. Some lead compounds are already being investigated, and it is likely that these would activate genes either as single agents or in combination with other epigenetic drugs. In this regard, it is likely that the future of epigenetic therapy will involve the utilization of multiple drugs that individually affect epigenetic silencing but that might be expected to have synergistic effects (Figure 4). Because of the interrelationships between epigenetic processes involved in silencing (Figure 1) and the demonstrated synergistic activities of DNA methylation and HDAC inhibitors (Cameron et al., 1999, Suzuki et al., 2004, Yamashita et al., 2002), there is much interest in combination therapies (Figure 4). These are now being tested in clinical trials, as are combinations of these inhibitors with standard chemotherapeutic regimens. Knowing about the potential importance of epigenetic silencing to cancer stem cells, more innovative approaches to removing these cancer progenitors might be possible. Cancer stem cells, refractory to standard chemotherapy, might be induced to differentiate by chronic administration of epigenetic drugs, as shown in Figure 4. Also, the activation of epigenetically silenced tumor suppressor miRNAs might allow for new treatment modalities (Saito et al., 2006).
A major impediment to the use of such drugs is that they are nonspecific and would be anticipated to reactivate genes nondiscriminately. However, this may not be as much of a problem as it seems, because DNA methylation inhibitors only act on dividing cells, leaving nondividing normal cells unaffected. Also, it appears that the drugs preferentially activate genes that have become abnormally silenced in cancer (Karpf et al., 1999, Liang et al., 2002). The reason for this is not clear but may be related to the fact that the chromatin structure associated with a pathologically silenced gene may be more susceptible to reactivation than the highly compacted chromatin state induced by physiological silencing. Nevertheless, the search for more specific targeted therapies remains a high priority.

Conclusions
As the role of epigenetics in cancer becomes clearer and the interrelationships between chromatin components are increasingly understood, we are at a good point to reevaluate our approaches to cancer prevention, detection, and therapy. It is clear that cancer cells have global changes in chromatin constitution involving the whole epigenome and that entire pathways relevant to cell renewal are subject to epigenetic dysregulation. The exciting links between epigenetics and stem cell behavior are just becoming manifest and are involved at the very earliest stages of tumor progression. This gives an important window on therapeutic intervention through prevention strategies. The approval of three, albeit nonspecific, drugs for therapy of established tumors gives new promise not only in this arena but also for new prevention strategies as well. Perhaps, as we continue to explore the molecular regulation of chromatin in both normal and neoplastic settings, we will become smarter in the use of agents to target cancer stem cells or miRNAs, for example, to make further inroads in resetting epigenetic abnormalities and achieving control of cancer.

Acknowledgments
Supported by grants R01 CA083867/R01 CA082422 (P.A.J.) and R01 CA04318/R01 CA116160 (S.B.B.) from the National Cancer Institute and R01 ES011858 from the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (S.B.B.). The authors thank G. Liang for help with the figures.
The discovery of microRNAs (miRNAs) almost two decades ago established a new paradigm of gene regulation. During the past ten years these tiny non-coding RNAs have been linked to virtually all known physiological and pathological processes, including cancer. In the same way as certain key protein-coding genes, miRNAs can be deregulated in cancer, in which they can function as a group to mark differentiation states or individually as bona fide oncogenes or tumour suppressors. Importantly, miRNA biology can be harnessed experimentally to investigate cancer phenotypes or used therapeutically as a target for drugs or as the drug itself.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, evolutionarily conserved, non-coding RNAs of 18–25 nucleotides in length that have an important function in gene regulation. Mature miRNA products are generated from a longer primary miRNA (pri-miRNA) transcript through sequential processing by the ribonucleases Drosha and Dicer1 (ref. 1). The first description of miRNAs was made in 1993 in Caenorhabditis elegans as regulators of developmental timing2,3. Later, miRNAs were shown to inhibit their target genes through sequences that are complementary to the target messenger RNA, leading to decreased expression of the target protein1 (Box 1). This discovery resulted in a pattern shift in our understanding of gene regulation because miRNAs are now known to repress thousands of target genes and coordinate normal processes, including cellular proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. The aberrant expression or alteration of miRNAs also contributes to a range of human pathologies, including cancer.

The control of gene expression by miRNAs is a process seen in virtually all cancer cells. These cells show alterations in their miRNA expression profiles, and emerging data indicate that these patterns could be useful in improving the classification of cancers and predicting their behaviour. In addition, miRNAs have now been shown to behave as cancer 'drivers' in the same way as protein-coding genes whose alterations actively and profoundly contribute to malignant transformation and cancer progression. Owing to the capacity of miRNAs to modulate tens to hundreds of target genes, they are emerging as important factors in the control of the 'hallmarks' of cancer4. In this Review, we summarize the findings that provide evidence for the central role of miRNAs in controlling cellular transformation and tumour progression. We also highlight the potential uses of miRNAs and miRNA-based drugs in cancer therapy and discuss the obstacles that will need to be overcome.
In 2002, Croce and colleagues first demonstrated that an miRNA cluster was frequently deleted or downregulated in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia5. This discovery suggested that non-coding genes were contributing to the development of cancer, and paved the way for the closer investigation of miRNA loss or amplification in tumours. Subsequently, miRNAs were shown to be differentially expressed in cancer cells, in which they formed distinct and unique miRNA expression patterns6, and whole classes of miRNAs could be controlled directly by key oncogenic transcription factors7. In parallel, studies with mouse models established that miRNAs were actively involved in tumorigenesis8. Collectively, these findings provided the first key insights into the relevance of miRNA biology in human cancer.
Despite these results, the sheer extent of involvement of miRNAs in cancer was not anticipated. miRNA genes are usually located in small chromosomal alterations in tumours (in amplifications, deletions or linked to regions of loss of heterozygosity) or in common chromosomal-breakpoints that are associated with the development of cancer9. In addition to structural genetic alterations, miRNAs can also be silenced by promoter DNA methylation and loss of histone acetylation10. Interestingly, somatic translocations in miRNA target sites can also occur, representing a drastic means of altering miRNA function11,12. The frequent deregulation of individual or clusters of miRNAs at multiple levels mirrors the deregulation for protein-coding oncogenes or tumour suppressors (Table 1).
In principle, somatic mutations that change an miRNA seed sequence could lead to the aberrant repression of tumour-suppressive mRNAs, but these seem to be infrequent13. Further sequencing could change this view, but this observation suggests that the intensity of miRNA signalling (altered by miRNA overexpression or underexpression) is more crucial than the specificity of the response. However, recent data indicate that miRNAs with an altered sequence can be produced through variable cleavage sites for Drosha and Dicer1, and that the presence of these variants can be perturbed in cancer14. Although the function of the variant 'isomiRs' remains unclear, in principle they could alter the quality of miRNA effects. State-of-the-art sequencing techniques will help to unmask mutations or modifications that otherwise would remain undetected. Whatever the mechanism, the widespread alteration in the expression of miRNAs is a ubiquitous feature of cancer.
Aberrant miRNA levels reflect the physiological state of cancer cells and can be detected by miRNA expression profiling and harnessed for the purpose of diagnosis and prognosis15,16. In fact, miRNA profiling can be more accurate at classifying tumours than mRNA profiling because miRNA expression correlates closely with tumour origin and stage, and can be used to classify poorly differentiated tumours that are difficult to identify using a standard histological approach6,17. Whether or not this increased classification power relates to the biology of miRNAs or the reduced complexity of the miRNA genome still needs to be determined.

The special features of miRNAs make them potentially useful for detection in clinical specimens. For example, miRNAs are relatively resistant to ribonuclease degradation, and they can be easily extracted from small biopsies, frozen samples and even formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues18. Furthermore, relatively simple and reproducible assays have been developed to detect the abundance of individual miRNAs, and methods that combine small RNA isolation, PCR and next-generation sequencing, allow accurate and quantitative assessment of all the miRNAs that are expressed in a patient specimen, including material that has been isolated by laser capture microdissection. The detection of global miRNA expression patterns for the diagnosis of cancers has not yet been proved; however, some individual or small groups of miRNAs have shown promise. For example, in non-small cell lung cancer, the combination of high miR-155 and low let-7 expression correlates with a poor prognosis, and in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia a 13 miRNA signature is associated with disease progression15,16. Further advances in the technology of miRNA profiling could help to revolutionize molecular pathology.

Perhaps the most appealing application of miRNAs as a cancer diagnostic tool comes from the discovery of circulating miRNAs in serum. For example, miR-141 expression levels in serum were significantly higher in patients with prostate cancer than in healthy control individuals19. Although the analysis of circulating miRNAs is only just beginning, the successful advancement of this technology could provide a relatively non-invasive diagnostic tool for single-point or longitudinal studies. With such diagnostic tools in place, miRNA profiling could be used to guide cancer classification, facilitate treatment decisions, monitor treatment efficacy and predict clinical outcome.
Although the expression of some miRNAs is increased in malignant cells, the widespread underexpression of miRNAs is a more common phenomenon. Whether this tendency is a reflection of a pattern associated with specific cells of origin, is a consequence of the malignant state or actively contributes to cancer development is still unclear. Because miRNA expression generally increases as cells differentiate, the apparent underexpression of miRNAs in cancer cells may, in part, be a result of miRNAs being 'locked' in a less-differentiated state. Alternatively, changes in oncogenic transcription factors that repress miRNAs or variability in the expression or activity of the miRNA processing machinery could also be important.

Two main mechanisms have been proposed as the underlying cause of the global downregulation of miRNAs in cancer cells. One involves transcriptional repression by oncogenic transcription factors. For example, the MYC oncoprotein, which is overexpressed in many cancers, transcriptionally represses certain miRNAs, although the extent to which this mediates its oncogenic activity or reflects a peripheral effect is still unknown20. The other mechanism proposed involves changes in miRNA biogenesis and is based on the observation that cancer cells often display reduced levels, or altered activity, of factors in the miRNA biogenesis pathway.
Functional studies show that miRNAs that are affected by somatic alterations in tumours can affect cancer phenotypes directly, therefore confirming their driver function in malignancy. As drivers of malignancy, mechanistic studies show that these miRNAs interact with known cancer networks; hence, tumour-suppressor miRNAs can negatively regulate protein-coding oncogenes, whereas oncogenic miRNAs often repress known tumour suppressors (Fig. 2a). Perhaps the best example of this is the oncogenic miR-17-92 cluster, in which individual miRNAs suppress negative regulators of phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase signalling or pro-apoptotic members of the BCL-2 family, which disrupts the processes that are known to influence cancer development.
Cancer-associated miRNAs can also alter the epigenetic landscape of cancer cells. The cancer 'epigenome' is characterized by global and gene-specific changes in DNA methylation, histone modification patterns and chromatin-modifying enzyme expression profiles, which impact gene expression in a heritable way29. In one way, miRNA expression can be altered by DNA methylation or histone modifications in cancer cells10,30, but miRNAs can also regulate components of the epigenetic machinery, therefore indirectly contributing to the reprogramming of cancer cells. For example, miR-29 inhibits DNMT3A and DNMT3B expression in lung cancer31, whereas miR-101 regulates the histone methyltransferase EZH2 in prostate cancer32. The presence of mature miRNAs in the nucleus33 is another indication of the potentially direct role that miRNAs have in controlling epigenetic modifications, such as DNA methylation and histone modifications — a hypothesis that has been established in plants34 but still needs to be demonstrated with certainty in mammals.

In the same way as protein-coding genes, miRNAs can be oncogenes or tumour suppressors depending on the cellular context in which they are expressed, which means that defining their precise contribution to cancer can be a challenge (Fig. 2b). The fact that miRNAs show tissue-specific expression and their output, shown in the cell's physiology, is dependent on the expression pattern of the specific mRNAs that harbour target sites could explain this apparent paradox. For example, the miR-29 family has a tumour-suppressive effect in lung tumours but appears oncogenic in breast cancer because of its ability to target the DNA methyltransferases DNMT3A and DNMT3B, and ZFP36, respectively31,35 (Table 1).

To further complicate the process, some miRNAs repress several positive components of a pathway, whereas others target both positive and negative regulators, possibly to buffer against minor physiological variations that could trigger much larger changes in the cell physiology36. In cancer cells, this buffering role can mean that some miRNAs could simultaneously target oncogenes and tumour-suppressor genes. In addition, combinations of miRNAs can cooperate to regulate one or several pathways, which increases the flexibility of regulation but confounds experimentalists37 (Fig. 2c). Consequently, the way in which miRNAs contribute to cancer development is conceptually similar to cancer-associated transcription factors such as MYC and p53, which are mediated through many targets that depend on contextual factors that are influenced by cell type and micro-environment. From a practical perspective it is crucial that miRNA targets are studied in a context that is appropriate to the environment that is being studied to determine what impact they will have on tumour cell behaviour (Fig. 2b).

Oncogenic pathways
Beyond the impact of somatic genetic and epigenetic lesions, the altered expression of miRNAs in cancer can arise through the aberrant activity of transcription factors that control their expression. Interestingly, the same transcription factors are often targets of miRNA-mediated repression, which gives rise to complex regulatory circuits and feedback mechanisms. Thus, a single transcription factor can activate or repress several miRNAs and protein-coding genes; in turn, the alteration in miRNA expression can affect more protein-coding genes that then amplifies the effects of a single gene.

As already mentioned, MYC directly contributes to the global transcriptional silencing of miRNAs20. This repression involves the downregulation of miRNAs with antiproliferative, antitumorigenic and pro-apoptotic activity such as, let-7, miR-15a/16-1, miR-26a or miR-34 family members38 (Fig. 2d; Table 1). Initial studies indicate that Myc uses both transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms to modulate miRNA expression. This phenomenon could be due to LIN28A and LIN28B being the direct target of MYC, and that they are required for MYC-mediated repression of let-7 (ref. 38). Furthermore, MYC directly activates the transcription of miR-17-92 polycistronic cluster and, given its oncogenic role, it may contribute to MYC-induced tumorigenesis39. MYC-driven reprogramming of miRNA expression could also be a factor in hepatocellular carcinoma, because of the contribution the reprogramming has to the aggressive phenotype of tumours originating from hepatic progenitor cells40. Some miRNAs, such as let-7, also regulate MYC, closing the regulatory circuit37.

miRNAs are embedded in many other oncogenic networks, including KRAS activation, which leads to the repression of several miRNAs. For example, in pancreatic cancer with mutant KRAS, RAS-responsive element-binding protein 1 (RREB1) represses miR-143 and miR-145 promoter, and at the same time both KRAS and RREB1 are targets of miR-143 and miR-145, revealing a feedforward mechanism that increases the effect of RAS signalling41. Similarly, KRAS is a target for several miRNAs, of which the let-7 family is the most representative example42. The integration of miRNAs into key oncogenic pathways, and the generation of feedforward and feedback loops that have a balancing effect, creates intricate ways to incorporate intracellular and extracellular signals in the decisions of cell proliferation or survival, and further implicates miRNAs in the pathogenesis of cancer.

TP53 is a master regulator of miRNAs
The TP53 tumour suppressor is perhaps the most important and well-studied cancer gene, and it is not surprising that several studies have suggested that miRNA biology can have a role in its regulation and activity (Fig. 2e). The p53 protein acts as a sequence-specific DNA-binding factor that can activate and repress transcription. Although there is no doubt that most of the actions of p53 can be explained by its ability to control canonical protein-coding targets such as CDKN1A and PUMA, it can also transactivate several miRNAs. One of the best-studied classes is the miR-34 family (Table 1), which represses genes that can promote proliferation and apoptosis — plausible targets in a p53-mediated tumour-suppressor response43. In principle, the action of p53 to induce the expression of miR-34 and other miRNAs can explain some of its transcriptional repressive functions.

The discovery of additional p53-regulated miRNAs, and the targeting of p53 or its pathway by other miRNAs, has provided general insights into the miRNA-mediated control of gene expression and the potential therapeutic opportunities for targeting the p53 network (Fig. 2e). Several p53-activated miRNAs, such as miR-192, miR-194, miR-215 and miR-605, can target MDM2, which is a negative regulator of p53 and a therapeutic target. These potentially relevant miRNAs can be epigenetically silenced in some types of cancer; however, their reactivation or reintroduction (see the section miRNAs as drugs and drug targets) offers an intriguing therapeutic opportunity for inhibiting MDM2 in tumours that harbour wild-type p53 (refs 44, 45). Similarly, p53 can also activate miR-107, miR-200 or miR-192, which are miRNAs that inhibit angiogenesis and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition46,47,48. Conversely, p53 can be repressed by certain oncogenic miRNAs including miR-380-5p, which is upregulated in neuroblastomas with MYCN amplification, or miR-504, which decreases p53-mediated apoptosis and cell-cycle arrest and can promote tumorigenesis49,50. However, the extent to which these miRNAs control life and death decisions in the p53 network still needs to be shown decisively to determine whether these miRNAs are valid therapeutic targets.

The studies mentioned have extended our understanding of the roles and regulation of p53 into the world of small non-coding RNAs, but the action on miRNA biology may be even more complex. For example, one study51 suggests that p53 can affect miRNA biogenesis by promoting pri-miRNA processing through association with the large Drosha complex (Fig. 2e), but the precise mechanism remains unclear51. In a more conventional way, the p53 family member p63 transcriptionally controls Dicer1 expression. Mutant TP53 can interfere with this regulation, which leads to a reduction in Dicer1 levels and reduces the levels of certain cancer-relevant miRNAs52. Thus, with the p53 network as a typical example, it is clear that miRNAs can interact with cancer-relevant pathways at multiple and unexpected levels and that a better understanding of miRNA biology will help to decipher the role and function of other important cancer genes.

Micromanagement of metastasis and beyond
In addition to promoting cancer initiation, miRNAs can modulate processes that support cancer progression, including metastasis53,54,55,56. As indicated earlier, changes in miRNA levels can occur through effects on their transcription or by global changes in the RNA interference (RNAi) machinery, and both mechanisms seem to be important for this process. For example, in breast cancer, miR-10b and miR-9 can induce metastasis, whereas miR-126, miR-335 and miR-31 act as suppressors. The miR-200 family inhibits epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, which influences one aspect of the metastatic process57. However, miR-200 could also promote the colonization of metastatic cells in breast cancer, which provides yet another example of the opposing activities of some miRNAs58. Conversely, in head and neck squamous-cell carcinomas, lung adenocarcinomas and breast cancers, the reduced levels of certain miRNAs that arise from Dicer1 downregulation also promote cell motility and are associated with enhanced metastasis in experimental models52,59.

The pleiotropic effects of miRNA biology on cancer extend to virtually all acquired cancer traits, including cancer-associated changes in intracellular metabolism and the tissue microenvironment. For example, most cancer cells display alterations in glucose metabolism termed the Warburg effect60. miRNAs may contribute to this metabolic switch because, in glioma cells, miR-451 controls cell proliferation, migration and responsiveness to glucose deprivation, thereby allowing the cells to survive metabolic stress61. The enhanced glutaminolysis observed in cancer cells can be partially explained by MYC-mediated repression of miR-23a and miR-23b (ref. 62) (Fig. 2d). In some cases, the control of these cancer-related processes by miRNAs creates an opportunity for new therapeutic approaches. Hence, miR-132, which is present in the endothelium of tumours but not in normal human endothelium, induces neovascularization by inhibition of p120RasGAP, a negative regulator of KRAS63. The delivery of a miR-132 inhibitor with nanoparticles that target the tumour vasculature suppresses angiogenesis in mice; this indicates there is a potential for the development of new antiangiogenic drugs. Further studies are likely to implicate miRNAs in the modulation of every tumour-associated pathway or trait.

Big lessons from mice
Much of what we have learnt concerning the functional contribution of miRNA biology to cancer development comes from studies in genetically engineered mice. These systems provide powerful tools for the genetic and biological study of miRNAs in an in vivo context, which is particularly important given the contextual activity of most miRNAs. In addition, owing to the ability of these models to recapitulate the behaviour of some human malignancies, they are useful in preclinical studies to evaluate new therapeutics.

Perhaps the most widespread use of mice for characterizing miRNA biology in cancer is the validation of miRNAs that are altered in cancer cells, as bona fide oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes. As already mentioned, the first direct evidence that miRNAs have a function in cancer came from mouse models, in which it was shown that expression of the miR-17-92 cluster — which is amplified in some human B cell lymphomas — cooperates with Myc to promote B-cell lymphoma in mice8. Subsequent studies that have used genetically engineered or transplantation-based systems identified the relevant miRNA components, showing that the miR-19 family (including miR-19a and miR-19b) represents the most potent oncogenes in this cluster28,64,65. Another example is miR-155 overexpression in the lymphoid compartment, which triggers B-cell leukaemia or a myeloproliferative disorder depending on the system used to drive expression of the transgene; this was the first example of an miRNA that initiates cancer in a transgenic setting66,67 (Table 1).

Gene targeting has been used extensively to delete miRNAs for the purpose of characterizing their physiological roles or action as candidate tumour suppressors. Gene targeting has suggested that miRNAs from similar families have redundant or compensatory functions, which has been shown for C. elegans68. Ablation of the miR-15a and miR-16-1 cluster, which is often deleted in human chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, predisposes mice to B-cell lymphoproliferative disease69 (Table 1). Importantly, the ability to produce mouse strains with different gene dosage through heterozygous or homozygous gene deletions has revealed that Dicer1, which if lost completely has a deleterious effect, can promote malignant phenotypes as a haploinsufficient tumour suppressor23. Such a conclusion could not be formed from studies that examined only genomic data.

Conditional gene expression systems in mice have allowed researchers to determine cancer gene dependencies, as well as whether genes that initiate cancer also participate in tumour maintenance. In many cases, withdrawal of the initiating oncogenic transgene (or restoration of the deleted or lost tumour suppressor) leads to the collapse of the tumour; this validates the transgene or pathway that is controlled by these genes, as a therapeutic target. Similar studies have also been applied to miRNAs; for example, conditional expression of miR-21, which is broadly deregulated in cancer, can promote lymphomagenesis in mice70 (Table 1). Silencing of miR-21 leads to disease regression, in part, by promoting apoptosis70 (Fig. 3a). Likewise, the use of miRNA inhibitors (for example, antagomirs) directed against miR-21 can inhibit the proliferation of human cancer cells that overexpress miR-21 (ref. 71). Together, these studies suggest that miR-21 antagonists have the potential to be effective therapies for at least some cancers.
The development of new technology has meant that mouse models are increasingly used to study gene function on a large if not genome-wide scale, and miRNAs are at the forefront of this revolution. Recently, a vast collection of mouse embryonic stem-cell clones that harbour deletions that target 392 miRNA genes was generated72. This unique and valuable toolbox, termed 'mirKO', will allow the creation of mice that lack specific miRNAs, express mutant miRNAs or the study of their expression. In a converse strategy, a collection of embryonic stem cells engineered to inducibly express the vast majority of known miRNAs is in production (S.W.L., Y. Park and G. Hannon, manuscript in preparation) and will allow the in vivo validation of miRNAs as oncogenes or as anticancer therapies. With a different strategy, miRNA sponges (Fig. 3b), which are oligonucleotide constructs with multiple complementary miRNA binding sites in tandem, have already been used to deplete individual miRNAs in transgenic fruitflies, in transplanted breast cancer cells in mice and in a transgenic mouse model56,73,74. Although these sponges provide a scalable strategy for miRNA loss-of-function studies, more work is needed to rule out off-target effects and assess their potency before conclusions can be made. However, the availability of such resources will help with the functional study of miRNAs in normal development and disease, and will be useful to the wider scientific community.

Finally, genetically engineered mouse models of human cancers are a testing ground for preclinical studies. For example, in Myc-induced liver tumours, miR-26 delivery by adeno-associated viruses suppresses tumorigenesis by inducing apoptosis75. The increasing use of state-of-the-art mouse models is likely to uncover new in vivo functions, such as metastasis and angiogenesis, that otherwise would have remained hidden in vitro. They will also provide key preclinical systems for testing miRNA-based therapeutics.

Constructing and deconstructing cancer
The use of RNAi technology — a tool that exploits miRNA pathways — has revolutionized the study of gene function in mammalian systems and has provided a powerful means to investigate the function of any protein-coding gene. Experimental triggers of RNAi exploit different aspects of the pathway and result in the downregulation of gene expression through incorporation into the miRNA biogenesis machinery at different points76. Small-interfering RNAs (siRNAs), which function at the level of Dicer1, can transiently and potently lead to gene suppression; these RNAi triggers, or their variants, are probably the structural 'scaffold' for miRNA therapeutics (see the section miRNAs as drugs or drug targets).

Stable RNAi can be activated by the expression of miRNA mimetics, that are either the so-called stem loop short-hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) or shRNAs that incorporate a larger miRNA fold. One example of the latter is based on miR-30 (known as miR-30-based shRNAs or 'shRNAmirs'). These shRNAs, as occurs naturally for many miRNAs, can be embedded in non-coding sequences of protein-coding transcripts or linked in tandem, which allows, for example, the linkage of the shRNA with a fluorescent reporter or the simultaneous knockdown of two different genes77,78. Advances in the shRNAmir methodology have allowed the development of versatile vectors for the study of proliferation and survival genes, strategies for optimizing the potency of shRNAs, and rapid and effective systems for conditional shRNA expression in mice79,80,81. The last of these, together with systems based on short stem-loop shRNAs82, could eventually allow the spatial, temporal and reversible control of any gene in vivo.

Regardless of the platform, RNAi technology provides an effective tool to investigate cancer phenotypes and identify therapeutic targets. For example, RNAi has been used to identify and characterize tumour-suppressor genes, which if inhibited promote cancer development. Early studies, using the same system that validated miR-17-92 as an oncogene, demonstrated that inhibition of TP53 could produce phenotypes that were consistent with TP53 loss83. Later studies showed that tumour suppressors could be identified prospectively using in vitro and in vivo shRNA screens, (for examples see refs 84 and 85). By conditionally expressing shRNAs that target tumour suppressors in mice, tumour-suppressor function in advanced tumours can be re-established by silencing the shRNA86. Tumour-suppressor reactivation leads to a marked (if not complete) tumour regression, which validates these pathways as therapeutic targets.

RNAi technology can be exploited more directly to identify genotype-specific cancer drug targets. Although there may be differences in the outcome of RNAi and small-molecule-mediated protein inhibition, siRNAs and shRNAs have been widely used to determine whether a candidate target is required for the proliferation of cancer cells. Moreover, the availability of RNAi libraries that target portions of, or all, the human genome allows genetic screens to identify 'synthetic lethal' genes, for which, if combined, the attenuation triggers the death of the cell. In principle, the identification of an RNAi target, the inhibition of which is selectively lethal to cells harbouring a particular oncogenic alteration, should identify cancer-specific targets. Such approaches have identified potential targets for KRAS-expressing tumours87,88,89 and leukaemias with deregulated MYC (ref. 90). Application of these approaches could potentially be complementary to the traditional drug-target discovery approach, and possibly a systematic way to identify the combination of therapies that will ultimately be needed to combat cancer.

miRNAs as drugs and drug targets
Despite advances in techniques to inhibit protein-coding genes using small molecules or biologicals, many cancers are unresponsive to the agents currently in use or become resistant to them; new and more creative approaches are therefore required for the treatment of cancer. Perhaps one of the most exciting opportunities that has arisen from our understanding of miRNA biology is the potential use of miRNA mimics or antagonists as therapeutics. Owing to the ability of miRNAs to simultaneously target multiple genes and pathways that are involved in cellular proliferation and survival38, the targeting of a single miRNA can be a form of 'combination' therapy that could obstruct feedback and compensatory mechanisms that would otherwise limit the effectiveness of many therapies in current use. In addition, because miRNA expression is often altered in cancer cells, agents that modulate miRNA activity could potentially produce cancer-specific effects10,91,92. Based on this, anticancer therapies that inhibit or enhance miRNA activity are being developed (Fig. 4). Evidence for this is shown by the inhibition of oncogenic miRNAs or the expression of tumour suppressor miRNAs in mice that harbour tumours, which have a significant effect on the outcome of cancer. Oncogenic miRNAs can be blocked by using antisense oligonucleotides, antagomirs, sponges or locked nucleic acid (LNA) constructs93. The use of LNAs has achieved unexpected success in vivo, not only in mice but also for the treatment of hepatitis C in non-human primates94. The downregulation of miR-122 can lead to a significant inhibition of replication of the hepatitis C virus. This inhibition is thought to decrease the risk of chronic hepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma in patients who are hepatitis C-positive. Early clinical studies using SPC3649, an miR-122 antagonist, in healthy individuals to assess toxicity will provide valuable information about pharmacokinetics and safety of the treatment. LNAs have been optimized to target miRNAs by reducing their molecular size and this, along with developing strategies for more efficient delivery, has increased their therapeutic potential95. By contrast, another strategy involves the restoration of tumour-suppressor miRNA expression by synthetic miRNA mimics or viral delivery93. Both of these approaches have yielded positive results in mouse models of cancer75,96. Adeno-associated virus delivery of miRNAs or miRNA antagonists has the advantage of being efficient and, because the virus does not integrate into the genome, non-mutagenic. However, the delivery and safety of treatment needs to be improved before this approach can achieve widespread clinical use.
In principle, the use of miRNA mimetics as therapeutics would allow 'drugging the undruggable' or the therapeutic inhibition of virtually any human gene. If this were possible it would undoubtedly impact many diseases including cancer by allowing the targeting of oncogenic transcription factors that are difficult to inhibit through traditional medicinal chemistry97. Furthermore, owing to the similar chemistry that is used to create drugs that target diverse molecules, the implementation of miRNA-based therapies could allow a more uniform drug development pipeline than is possible for more conventional treatments. Although experimental studies have validated the underlying biological impact of achieving miRNA modulation, there are still practical challenges that prevent the use of miRNA mimetics and antagonists clinically, including uncharacterized off-target effects, toxicities and poor agent-delivery. Concerning the last of these, most miRNA mimetics and antagonists rely on the delivery of molecules that mimic or inhibit the 'seed' sequence of an miRNA (typically molecules that consist of ≥6 nucleotides or related structures) across the plasma membrane — a particular challenge in the treatment of cancer, in which missing even a few cancer cells could lead to tumour relapse and progression. Extensive research is now focused on the viral and non-viral strategies required to meet this challenge, and results in the preclinical setting are promising75,94,95,96. Despite the considerable hurdles that have to be overcome, it seems likely that miRNAs will find a place alongside more conventional approaches for the treatment of cancer.

Perspectives
Since the discovery of miRNAs in model organisms, miRNAs have emerged as key regulators of normal development and a diversity of normal cellular processes. Given what we know now, it is not surprising that perturbations in miRNA biogenesis or expression can contribute to disease. In cancer, the effects of miRNA alteration can be widespread and profound, and they touch on virtually all aspects of the malignant phenotype. Yet, precisely how miRNAs regulate the expression of protein-coding genes is not completely understood, and the underlying mechanism remains an important basic-science question that will have a significant impact on our understanding of gene regulation and its alteration in disease. In addition, we still lack effective approaches to understand and predict miRNA targets. New strategies to identify and characterize the targets of individual miRNAs, and to determine how they function in combination to regulate specific targets, will be required to understand their action on cell physiology. Because miRNAs can also regulate other non-coding RNAs (for example, long non-coding RNAs), which have a role in cancer development and vice versa98, these interactions will increase the complexity of gene regulation and are likely to produce regulatory processes that are currently hidden. Pioneering knowledge, gained through the study of miRNA function and regulation, will undoubtedly provide methodological and theoretical insights that will help in our understanding of the more recently identified non-coding RNA species.

Understanding miRNA biology and how it contributes to cancer development is not only an academic exercise, but also provides an opportunity for the generation of new ideas for diagnosis and treatment. RNAi-based technology has allowed sophisticated loss-of-function experiments that were previously impossible and has revealed therapeutic targets that, when inhibited, can lead to cancer cell elimination. In addition, miRNAs themselves are being used directly in the diagnosis of cancer and, in the future, will probably be exploited in therapy to identify drug targets or as the drug treatment. However, cost-effective miRNA profiling strategies and larger studies are needed to determine whether miRNA profiling provides an advantage for cancer classification compared with a more traditional approach. Although drugs that function as miRNA mimetics, antagonists or synthetic siRNAs form the core of what is fundamentally a new class of drugs that are capable of targeting molecules outside the range of traditional medicinal chemistry, their clinical implementation will require improvements in drug composition and delivery; these challenges lie outside the scope of molecular biology and instead involve the fields of chemistry and nanotechnology. Nevertheless, the successful development of these technologies could ultimately translate our understanding of miRNA biology in cancer into strategies for the control of cancer.
Abstract
BACKGROUND
Despite decades of basic and clinical research and trials of promising new therapies, cancer remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality. We assessed overall progress against cancer in the United States from 1970 through 1994 by analyzing changes in age-adjusted mortality rates.

METHODS
We obtained from the National Center for Health Statistics data on all deaths from cancer and from cancer at specific sites, as well as on deaths due to cancer according to age, race, and sex, for the years 1970 through 1994. We computed age-specific mortality rates and adjusted them to the age distribution of the U.S. population in 1990.

RESULTS
Age-adjusted mortality due to cancer in 1994 (200.9 per 100,000 population) was 6.0 percent higher than the rate in 1970 (189.6 per 100,000). After decades of steady increases, the age-adjusted mortality due to all malignant neoplasms plateaued, then decreased by 1.0 percent from 1991 to 1994. The decline in mortality due to cancer was greatest among black males and among persons under 55 years of age. Mortality among white males 55 or older has also declined recently. These trends reflect a combination of changes in death rates from specific types of cancer, with important declines due to reduced cigarette smoking and improved screening and a mixture of increases and decreases in the incidence of types of cancer not closely related to tobacco use.

CONCLUSIONS
The war against cancer is far from over. Observed changes in mortality due to cancer primarily reflect changing incidence or early detection. The effect of new treatments for cancer on mortality has been largely disappointing. The most promising approach to the control of cancer is a national commitment to prevention, with a concomitant rebalancing of the focus and funding of research.
n 1986, when one of us reported on trends in the incidence of cancer in the United States from 1950 through 1982,1 it was clear that some 40 years of cancer research, centered primarily on treatment, had failed to reverse a long, slow increase in mortality. Here we update that analysis through 1994. Our evaluation begins with 1970, both to provide some overlap with the previous article and because passage of the National Cancer Act of 1971 marked a critical increase in the magnitude and vigor of the nation's efforts in cancer research.2

inThe 1986 report and follow-up articles1,3-5 were criticized,6-8 primarily on the grounds that research already completed had not yet been incorporated into practice and that new research findings were on the way. Critics also argued that data for all cancers combined are not meaningful and that the study of age-adjusted mortality rates is not appropriate when the rates in different age groups exhibit different trends, as they do for cancer.
The Senate asked the National Cancer Institute to convene a committee to consider how to measure progress against cancer, and it published its report in 1990.9 The committee recommended that progress be assessed in three general areas: direct measures (mortality, incidence, and survival, including the quality of life), portents of change (such as reductions in tobacco use), and advances in knowledge that may have an effect in the future.9 Direct measures were taken to be central to the assessment of progress.
The most basic measure of progress against cancer is age-adjusted mortality. The use of rates removes the effect of changes in the overall size of the population. Adjustment for age further removes the effect of changes in the age distribution of the population, and with it the effect of changing mortality from causes other than cancer. The use of mortality as the chief measure of progress against cancer, rather than incidence or survival, focuses attention on the outcome that is most reliably reported and is of greatest concern to the public: death. The use of rates for all types of cancer combined, though difficult to interpret in biologic terms, usefully supplements site-specific rates because it prevents selective reporting of data to support particular views and minimizes the effects of changes in the diagnosis and reporting of specific types of cancer.

Briefly summarized, the reason for not focusing on the reported incidence of cancer is that the scope and precision of diagnostic information, practices in screening and early detection, and criteria for reporting cancer have changed so much over time that trends in incidence are not reliable.1 For example, the development and vigorous commercial promotion of the test for prostate-specific antigen occurred at the same time as a doubling of the reported incidence of cancer of the prostate between 1974 and 1990 (from 65.6 per 100,000 population to 131.8 per 100,000),10 without visibly affecting mortality. Few knowledgeable observers believe that either the true frequency or the lethality of the disease has changed much. A similar but smaller trend has affected rates of breast cancer, and there are reasons for concern about the incidence of other cancers.1

Trends in survival rates are also suspect, because they are based on the same series of patients as incidence rates, and any inflation of incidence due to the inclusion of less malignant or nonmalignant diseases creates a spurious increase in case survival rates.
Methods
SOURCES OF DATA
Numbers of deaths according to year, age, race, sex, and cancer site were obtained from the National Center for Health Statistics.11 Population data came from the Bureau of the Census and the National Center for Health Statistics12,13 (and Rosenberg H, Mortality Statistics Branch: personal communication). Other data were obtained from the National Cancer Institute.10

Age-specific mortality rates, the building blocks of age-adjusted rates, are simple ratios of numbers of deaths to the size of the population. The numerators are the numbers of deaths from a specific cancer or group of cancers among people in specific age ranges and, often, with specific demographic characteristics. The denominator is the corresponding U.S. population, as estimated by the Bureau of the Census. Data adjusted for age by the “direct” method (which we use throughout) are weighted sums of these age-specific rates, with the weights determined by reference to some fixed population, such as the total U.S. population in the 1990 census.14 For example, age adjustment of rates for each of the years from 1984 through 1994 to the 1990 standard entails the estimation of mortality as if the actual population in each of those years had the same age distribution as the 1990 U.S. population.

If we want to examine recent changes in overall mortality due to cancer, the most appropriate reference population for adjustment is one that falls within, or very close to, the period of study. Because we are focusing largely on events in recent years, we have used the U.S. population as reflected in the 1990 census.

When trends in different age groups diverge, the choice of a reference population can make a substantial difference in estimated trends. For example, the population of the United States was much younger in 1940 than in 1990, and hence the use of the 1940 population as the reference group gives greater weight to mortality rates among younger persons, which have been declining, whereas rates in older persons have been increasing. Therefore, the 1940 standard gives an unduly favorable picture of recent trends in mortality due to cancer; rates adjusted to the 1970 standard lie between those adjusted to 1940 and those adjusted to 1990. Data presented at a recent press conference by the Department of Health and Human Services and the American Cancer Society, and in a related publication, reported rates that were adjusted to the 1970 and 1940 populations.
shows age-adjusted death rates for all malignant neoplasms, year by year, since 1986. For the U.S. population as a whole, the long-sustained annual increase in mortality due to cancer ceased in about 1991. Between 1991, when the highest rate was reported, and 1994, the most recent year for which data are available, mortality decreased by 1.0 percent (from 203.0 to 200.9 per 100,000 population). This drop may well portend larger improvements to come. Even if rates turn upward again, the decline will surely resume within the next few years as a result of reductions in smoking over recent decades.

For historical perspective, U.S. cancer mortality rates, age adjusted to 1970 by the National Cancer Institute, increased by an estimated 0.3 percent annually from 1975 through 1993, as compared with an increase of 0.1 percent per year from 1950 through 1975.10 This accelerated increase in mortality due to cancer occurred despite the enlarged scope of cancer research since 1971.
presents trends in mortality from all malignant neoplasms since 1970, according to race and sex. After decades of rather steady increases in each demographic group, mortality rates plateaued or declined slightly in the 1990s, most notably in the black male population, among whom the recent downward trend follows years of rapidly increasing mortality.
Mortality from All Malignant Neoplasms, 1970 through 1994, in the Total U.S. Population as a Percentage of the Rate in 1970, According to Age and Sex.
Figure 2 shows trends since 1970 for males and females in two broad age groups. The population under 55 years of age is much larger than the older population, whereas rates of mortality due to cancer are much higher among older people than in the younger age group. As a result, the smaller percentage increase in mortality observed in the smaller, older group represents more deaths than the larger percentage decrease in the younger group. The interplay of these factors determines the populationwide rate, which has changed much more slowly than rates within these two broad age groups.
Among older persons, both men and women, mortality due to cancer increased by 15 to 20 percent between 1970 and 1994, with a recent decline among older men. During the same period, mortality due to cancer among people younger than 55 decreased by about 25 percent for both sexes. The close parallels between the rates for males and females in each age category seem coincidental, since the rates for the two sexes reflect distinct patterns of cancer sites.
We turn now to some specific forms of cancer. Mortality due to breast cancer has increased by approximately 10 percent since 1970 among women 55 years of age or older, with a recent plateau, but has decreased by almost 25 percent among younger women (Figure 3). The recent and substantial increase in the use of mammography among women over 50, for whom annual examination is known to be effective, has not prevented this increase. These data suggest that a true increase in incidence may have been only partially offset by the effectiveness of screening. Although mammography before the age of 50 is controversial, these data suggest that declines in mortality were well established before mammography became widely used. Overall, the decrease among younger women and the increase among older women have left population-wide mortality almost unchanged.
For lung cancer, death rates for women 55 or older have increased to almost four times the 1970 rate, whereas rates among males younger than 55 have decreased slightly (Figure 4). Rates for older men and younger women have risen since 1970, but with some recent downturn. These trends reflect delayed effects of changes in smoking habits that occurred decades ago.
shows trends in mortality for additional types of cancer from 1970 through 1993. Age-adjusted rates for several important types of cancer declined steadily. The decrease in cancer of the stomach, observed worldwide over many decades, is not well understood, but it is largely or entirely a result of decreasing incidence rather than earlier detection or improved therapy. The sharp decline for cancer of the cervix is also not fully explained but reflects a combination of reduced incidence and improvements in the detection of premalignant lesions by means of the Papanicolaou smear and their subsequent removal; earlier detection of invasive cervical neoplasms may also be important. Deaths from cancer of the uterus (including uterine neoplasms not specified as of the cervix) are primarily due to endometrial cancers, but they include a small proportion of deaths from cervical cancer reported as nonspecific cancer of the uterus and a few malignant myometrial neoplasms. Here, too, there has been a sustained decline, though not as great as for cervical cancer, and at least a part of this improvement is due to earlier detection.

Mortality from leukemia (all types and in all age groups) has also decreased. Deaths from colorectal cancer (including anal cancer) decreased substantially for reasons that are not entirely clear, but they may include earlier detection as well as a reduction in incidence.10 Improved treatment has contributed little.

Small increases have been reported for malignant brain tumors and malignant melanoma, shown here since 1979, when the National Center for Health Statistics introduced a new format for reporting mortality data.11 Mortality from lymphomas and other lymphoid neoplasms (including Hodgkin's disease, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and multiple myeloma) increased by 17.3 percent from 1970 to 1993, despite reductions in mortality from Hodgkin's disease alone.10

Trends in mortality due to cancer among children require special comment. Death rates for each major category of childhood cancer have declined by about 50 percent since the 1970s (data not shown). The decline is continuing, and the percentage drop in the most recent 10-year period is slightly greater than that for the previous 10 years. To put this finding in perspective, however, cancer accounted for only 1699 deaths among children under 15 years of age in the United States in 1993, among a total of 529,904 deaths due to cancer in all age groups.11 Even the complete elimination of deaths due to childhood cancer would have little effect on the national death toll.

Discussion
It is worth reviewing probable reasons for these changes in mortality due to cancer. Some declines are clearly a result of reduced incidence or earlier detection (cancer of the cervix, other cancers of the uterus, and cancers of the colon, rectum, and stomach). Similarly, recent changes in mortality from lung cancer are certainly due to changes in smoking patterns over the past few decades. The smaller increases in mortality from melanoma and cancer of the brain, the prostate, and perhaps the breast (in older women) can hardly be due to a decline in the effectiveness of treatment; they must reflect rising incidence. Thus, the observed trends largely reflect changing incidence or earlier detection, rather than improved therapy.

Despite numerous past claims that success was just around the corner, mortality due to cancer continued to increase, until quite recently. The death rate in 1994 was 2.7 percent higher than in 1982, the last year covered in the 1986 paper,1 but it is likely that the recent downturn will be confirmed and substantially extended as a result of improved prevention and earlier detection and, especially, past reductions in tobacco use.

In 1986, we concluded that “some 35 years of intense effort focused largely on improving treatment must be judged a qualified failure.”1 Now, with 12 more years of data and experience, we see little reason to change that conclusion, though this assessment must be tempered by the recognition of some areas of important progress. These include the much-improved outlook for children and young adults with cancer, which is entirely the result of improved treatment; better treatment for Hodgkin's disease; far better palliation of many kinds of advanced cancer; a better understanding of cancer, which as a by-product has improved the medical management of nonmalignant immunologic, metabolic, and viral diseases, including the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; and great improvements in imaging technology. Though these benefits must not be discounted, their effects on overall mortality due to cancer have been largely disappointing.

The argument that rising incidence has just balanced rising case survival rates, so that mortality is roughly constant, seems unlikely to be true but is irrelevant anyway. However one analyzes and interprets the present data, the salient fact remains that age-adjusted rates of death due to cancer are now barely declining. Hopes for a substantial reduction in mortality by the year 2000 were clearly misplaced.17 The effect of primary prevention (e.g., reductions in the prevalence of smoking) and secondary prevention (e.g., the Papanicolaou smear) on mortality due to cancer indicates a pressing need for reevaluation of the dominant research strategies of the past 40 years, particularly the emphasis on improving treatments, and a redirection of effort toward prevention.

Unfortunately, the means to prevent most cancers have not yet been elucidated, adequately tested, and shown to be effective and feasible. For example, we need to know more about how to help the smoker who wants to quit, and much of the evidence that diet is related to one third or more of cancers18 must be reduced to findings about specific dietary components. The needed research on prevention may demand as much in time, effort, and resources as has already been invested in studies of treatment. We emphatically do not propose that research on treatment be stopped; there should, however, be a substantial realignment of the balance between treatment and prevention, and in an age of limited resources this may well mean curtailing efforts focused on therapy.

Prevention is much broader than the elimination of carcinogens. For example, recent progress in understanding the roles of dietary modification, chemoprophylaxis (e.g., with retinoic acid and tamoxifen), and genetic predispositions to cancer (in order to reduce exposure to carcinogens and to increase surveillance with the goal of earlier detection) holds intriguing promise for substantial reductions in mortality due to cancer, although much critical research remains to be done. Also part of “prevention” research is the investigation of risk factors for cancer in order to determine which factors can be modified and investigations in the behavioral sciences aimed at improving the application of findings relevant to prevention. The role of basic research is unclear, partly because what is called “basic” is highly subjective and can be rapidly redefined in response to threatened budget cuts. However, we support the expansion of basic-science research that is not so basic as to have no clear, direct, and specific link to prevention.

Will we at some future time do better in the war against cancer? The present optimism about new therapeutic approaches rooted in molecular medicine may turn out to be justified, but the arguments are similar in tone and rhetoric to those of decades past about chemotherapy, tumor virology, immunology, and other approaches. In our view, prudence requires a skeptical view of the tacit assumption that marvelous new treatments for cancer are just waiting to be discovered.

We, like others, earnestly hope that such discoveries can and will be made, but it is now evident that the worldwide cancer research effort should undergo a substantial shift toward efforts to improve prevention. Will this shift mean that prevention research will ultimately succeed in the way that treatment research was expected to succeed? There is no guarantee that it will. The ultimate results may be as disappointing as those to date from treatment efforts, but it is time to find out.

There are also questions of implementation. Prevention is likely to be more difficult and costly than treatment, which can be rather narrowly focused on persons in need during a limited time and can be provided without major changes in the ambient environment, workplace, diet, or consumer products. Treatment, if it could be made to work, would obviously be much simpler.

The public seems to understand the need for the shift in attitude and emphasis toward prevention. The evidence includes the large and continuing reduction in smoking, widespread individual efforts to change diet to prevent cancer, and the use of sunscreens to reduce exposure to sunlight. The government has had little role in these changes. However, to leave this matter entirely to the public is to risk faddism, on the one hand, and a turning away from orthodox therapy, on the other.

Aside from overstatement of the decline in mortality due to cancer in the United States in recent years, the recent joint press conference15 held by the Department of Health and Human Services and the American Cancer Society was notable for its public recognition of the importance of prevention in the effort to control cancer. According to Secretary of Health and Human Services Donna Shalala,

We must continue to work for the day when our children must turn to the history books to learn about a disease called cancer. . . . It will take better research, better treatments, better detection, and most important, it will take better education. . . . From tobacco to poor diet to lack of reproductive screenings, we must give the American people the information they need to prevent cancer and make the best choices with their lives.15

We hope that this statement, as well as the recent increase in support of prevention activities in the National Cancer Institute budget,19 represents an early step in the commitment to prevention, rather than lip service obscuring blind faith in treatment-based approaches.

The best of modern medicine has much to offer to virtually every patient with cancer, for palliation if not always for cure, and every patient should have access to the earliest possible diagnosis and the best possible treatment. The problem is the lack of substantial improvement over what treatment could already accomplish some decades ago. A national commitment to the prevention of cancer, largely replacing reliance on hopes for universal cures, is now the way to go.
Early spread of tumor cells is usually undetected by current imaging technologies. In patients with cancer and no signs of overt metastases sensitive methods have been developed to detect circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in the peripheral blood and disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) in the bone marrow. These technologies can be classified into cytometric and/or immunological and molecular approaches. Interestingly, the bone marrow seems to be a common homing tissue for cells derived from various epithelial tumors, and level 1a data from European and US groups have confirmed the prognostic impact of DTCs in the bone marrow of patients with breast cancer. Sequential peripheral blood analyses, however, are more convenient than bone marrow analyses for patients with solid tumors, and many research groups are currently assessing the clinical use of CTCs for assessment of prognosis and monitoring of systemic therapy. Molecular characterization of DTCs and CTCs opens a new avenue for understanding cancer dormancy, and might contribute to the identification of metastatic stem cells with important implications for future therapies. This Review focuses on the clinical relevance of the latest research results on blood-borne cancer micrometastases in patients with cancer.
Cytometric/immunological and molecular approaches are the major methods to detect single DTCs/CTCs within bone marrow or blood cells

These technologies provide the potential to monitor systemic tumor-cell dissemination as one of the first crucial steps in the metastatic cascade

Various clinical studies demonstrated level 1a evidence for an association between the presence of DTCs in bone marrow and postoperative metastatic relapse, particularly in patients with breast cancer

Many research groups are assessing the clinical use of CTC detection in the peripheral blood for prognosis prediction and real-time monitoring of systemic therapies, with promising results

The assessment and monitoring of therapeutic targets on CTCs (and probably DTCs) might become an important future diagnostic tool to guide treatment decisions before the onset of overt metastases

The molecular characterization of DTCs/CTCs might contribute to a greater understanding of cancer dormancy and the role of metastatic stem cells, with important implications for future therapies.
Despite considerable advances in the diagnosis and treatment of solid tumors, distant metastases remain the main cause of cancer-related death. Early spread of tumor cells is usually undetected—even by high-resolution imaging technologies—which prevents early, potentially effective intervention. Sensitive immunocytochemical and molecular assays have permitted specific detection of 'occult' metastatic tumor cells even at the single-cell stage.1 These technologies provide the potential to monitor systemic tumor-cell dissemination in the blood and bone marrow as one of the first crucial steps in the metastatic cascade. Interestingly, the bone marrow seems to be a common homing tissue for blood-borne disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) derived from primary carcinomas arising in various epithelial organs such as the breast, lung, prostate or colon.2 In the clinic, detection and characterization of DTCs in the bone marrow, or circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in the blood, could help to guide treatment decisions before the onset of overt metastases, as well as in the setting of advanced disease.

The detection of DTCs in lymph nodes is also a clinically relevant topic.3,4,5 Immunocytological or polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based assays enable the detection of small tumor cell clusters or isolated cancer cells in histopathologically negative nodes, and might improve tumor staging in patients with solid tumors of the breast, esophagus, lung and pancreas.3,6,7,8,9 This application is of particular interest in the context of sentinel-lymph-node analyses in breast cancer where only one (or a few) nodes are analyzed, with the goal of sparing patients from the morbidity of complete axillary lymph-node dissection.3,5,10 This article will focus on hematogeneous tumor cell spread and the relevance of DTC/CTC analyses in bone marrow and blood.
Detection methods
The detection of the extremely low numbers of DTCs and CTCs (that is, 1 × 10−5 to 1 × 10−6) in the bone marrow and blood is, in most cases, more efficient when using an initial enrichment step. These enrichments include gradient centrifugation using Ficoll-Hypaque and immunomagnetic bead separation, either performed as positive selection using epithelium-specific antibodies (for example, anti-EpCAM [epithelial cell adhesion molecule]) or via negative depletion of hematopoietic cells (for example, antibodies against the common leukocyte antigen CD45). Size-based enrichment of CTCs has also been described, for example, by membrane filter devices such as ISET (isolation by size of epithelial tumor cells)11,12 or MEMS (micro electro-mechanical system)-based microfilter approaches.13 Advantages and disadvantages of these enrichment methods have been reviewed previously in detail.2 Briefly, size-based enrichment is hampered by the fact that the size of DTCs/CTCs is variable and leukocytes might clot the filter pores. Ficoll-Hypaque centrifugation is an easy method, but it can result in a substantial loss of DTCs/CTCs.14 Among the immunomagnetic procedures, positive selection is frequently used but limited by the potential loss of DTCs/CTCs not expressing the target antigen (for example, EpCAM). By contrast, negative selection (for example, usually by depletion of CD45+ hematopoietic cells) results in the unbiased enrichment of DTCs/CTCs and avoids stimulating DTCs/CTCs through binding of antibodies to tumor cells, which can be a problem for subsequent expression analysis of positively enriched DTCs/CTCs.14 Current methods for differentiation of DTCs/CTCs from normal cells can be classified into cytometric/immunological and molecular approaches.

Cytometric/Immunological approaches
Immunocytochemistry is the most widely used cytometric/immunological approach, and has the advantage of being able to facilitate characterization of cell size and shape, as well as the nucleus–plasma relation that might be disturbed by atypical enlarged nuclei in malignant cells of each individual event. Monoclonal antibodies against various epithelium-specific antigens, such as cytoskeleton-associated cytokeratins, surface adhesion molecules, or growth factor receptors are applied for the detection of DTCs/CTCs because of the absence of tumor-specific diagnostic targets.
To overcome problems of sensitivity and specificity of currently available methods, and to provide a basis for future multicentric clinical trials, a consensus concept for the standardized detection and enrichment of DTCs has been proposed.15 Importantly, criteria to evaluate morphology and staining results after automatic microscopic screening using sophisticated imaging approaches have also been defined .
Several new techniques have been developed and applied for the detection of DTCs/CTCs. The most-advanced commercially available technology is the CellSearch® system (Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ), which constitutes an automated enrichment and immunostaining device that has been approved by the FDA for the detection of CTCs in patients with metastatic breast, colon and prostate cancer.17,18,19,20 A new technique, designated EPISPOT (epithelial immunospot) allows detection of viable DTCs and CTCs owing to their ability to secrete individual proteins after 48 h of short-term culture (Table 1).21 Most recently, a microfluid platform called the “CTC-chip”, which consists of an array of anti-EpCAM antibody-coated microposts capable of capturing CTCs from unfractionated blood under controlled laminar flow conditions, was presented.22 CTC counts 2–3 log units higher than those found by other groups were reported by Pachmann et al.23 in nearly 100% of patients with breast cancer using the MAINTRAC® (Pachmann, Bayreuth, Germany) assay (Table 1). Furthermore, ultra-speed automated digital microscopy fiber-optic array scanning technology (FAST) and laser printing techniques have been developed to detect CTCs labeled by fluorescence-dye-conjugated antibodies mounted directly on a slide.24,25 Other slide-based automated scanning microscopes (for example, Ikoniscope® [Ikonisys, New Haven, CT] and Ariol® [Applied Imaging, Santa Clara, CA]) were introduced for detecting CTCs,26,27 with promising results that need to be validated in large clinical studies (Table 1). These techniques allow the detection of CTCs in 1 ml of blood from almost all patients with metastatic or nonmetastatic cancer (92–100%), whereas no CTCs were found in healthy controls (n = 11). The advantage of the Ikoniscope® (Ikonisys) is the ability to image morphologically identifiable cells, both by different antibodies as well as by fluorescence in situ hybridization, to detect chromosomal abnormalities.26 Concerning the Ariol® (Applied Imaging) system, the enrichment step has been improved (positive selection of CTCs on the basis of EpCAM and cytokeratin expression), leading to a significantly higher CTC detection rate than the CellSearch® (Johnson & Johnson) system.27

All EpCAM-based enrichment systems have the problem that EpCAM can be down-regulated during epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of DTCs. Recent work indicates that this transition might affect tumor cells with stem-cell properties.28 Thus, enrichment systems that target different epithelial antigens,27 or negative depletion strategies that circumvent the biased selection of a particular DTC/CTC population,21,29 might be advantageous.

Molecular PCR-based techniques
Molecular detection of DTCs based on PCR amplification of either DNA or complementary DNA (mRNA) is hindered by the fact that the tumor cells of interest cannot be morphologically identified and isolated for further analyses. DNA-based methods rely on the detection of known gene mutations, amplifications or methylation patterns in the tumor cells. Owing to the tremendous heterogeneity of genetic alterations in tumor cells, no universally applicable DNA marker currently exists for DTC/CTC screening. Determination of epithelium-specific or organ-specific mRNA species, such as cytokeratin 19 and 20, mammaglobin or prostate-specific-antigen mRNA, by reverse transcription (RT)-PCR are promising for detecting DTCs/CTCs.1 Advantages and disadvantages of these RT-based techniques have already been described elsewhere.1

Relevance of micrometastatic cells
Assessment of prognosis
Various clinical data have provided evidence for an association between the presence of DTCs, detected at the time of tumor resection, and postoperative metastatic relapse in patients with cancers of the breast, prostate, lung and gastrointestinal tract.30 This work has paved the way for the detection of DTCs being included in international tumor staging systems.31,32 At present, the largest database exists for patients with breast cancer. A pooled analysis of data from European and US groups has confirmed the prognostic impact of DTCs in the bone marrow of patients with breast cancer (1a level of evidence). The analysis of 4,703 patients, using conventional staging procedures such as bone scans, showed that approximately 30% of women with primary breast cancer harbored DTCs in their bone marrow at primary diagnosis in the absence of any signs of overt metastases.33 The extended 10 year follow-up of these patients revealed an unfavorable prognosis compared with patients without DTCs.33 In total, 1,499 patients received only hormonal therapy, 1,596 received cytotoxic therapy, 119 received combined hormonal–cytotoxic therapy and 1,489 had no therapy, of whom 1,036 patients had stage pT1N0 disease. The presence of micrometastases was a significant prognostic factor with respect to poor overall survival and breast-cancer-specific survival (univariate mortality ratios, 2.15 and 2.44, respectively; P <0.001 for both outcomes) and poor disease-free survival and distant-disease-free survival (incidence-rate ratios, 2.13 and 2.33, respectively; P <0.001 for both outcomes). In the multivariate analysis, DTC detection was an independent predictor of poor outcome. In the univariate subgroup analysis, breast-cancer-specific survival among patients with micrometastases was significantly shortened (P <0.001 for all comparisons) among those who received adjuvant endocrine treatment (mortality ratio, 3.22) or cytotoxic therapy (mortality ratio, 2.32). Moreover, breast-cancer-specific survival was significantly shortened among patients who had tumors no larger than 2 cm in diameter without lymph-node metastases, and who did not receive systemic adjuvant therapy (mortality ratio, 3.65). In 2008, Bidard et al.34 reported the prognostic relevance of DTC detection in patients with stage I–III breast cancer. Excluding cytokeratin-positive normal bone marrow cells by stringent morphological criteria, they identified 15% of patients with breast cancer as DTC-positive (n = 621).

Repeated bone marrow sampling is considered the standard of care in patients with leukemias or lymphomas, but it seems to be difficult to introduce in the clinical management of patients with solid tumors. Sequential peripheral blood analyses are more convenient to assess, and many research groups are currently assessing the clinical use of CTC detection. Most of the work in this area has been performed on patients with breast cancer (Table 2). At present, there are only a limited number of studies comparing bone marrow and peripheral blood examinations performed at the same time points. Nevertheless, all studies showed a higher frequency of bone-marrow-positive aspirates than blood-positive samples from the same patients with breast cancer,35,36,37,38 probably because the bone marrow might provide conditions for homing and survival of DTCs—thus contributing to their accumulation in this compartment. By contrast, the half life of CTCs in the circulation seems to be short (1.0–2.4 h)39 and many CTCs rapidly undergo apoptosis.40 Thus, blood analyses provide only a snapshot of tumor cell dissemination, whereas DTCs in bone marrow might have accumulated in this tissue over an extended period of time. However, it remains unclear whether DTCs in bone marrow might be a better approach for assessment of dissemination than the detection of CTCs in blood because blood is the common transport system for tumor cells spreading to various distant sites (for example, brain, liver and lungs). These cells might not necessarily always home to bone marrow, which could explain false-negative findings of the bone marrow test in predicting metastatic relapse.33
The clinical significance of CTCs is under active investigation. Encouraging results on the association between CTC detection and metastatic relapse in patients with breast cancer at various disease stages have been published (Table 2). Although different anti-cytokeratin antibodies are used for immunocytochemical detection, including pan-anti-cytokeratin-antibodies, RT-PCR approaches in breast cancer studies are mainly based on the detection of cytokeratin 19 mRNA expression.

Could bone marrow analysis be replaced by measurements of CTC counts? Thus far, only few studies have directly compared bone marrow and blood analyses in the same patients.35,36,38,41,42 Wiedswang et al.36 published the largest study on 341 patients with stage I–IV breast cancer, and showed that the detection of DTCs in bone marrow had superior prognostic significance over CTC measurements in patients without metastatic disease. By contrast, Bidard et al.38 reported superior significance of CTC counts, but they only analyzed data from 37 patients with metastatic (stage M1) breast cancer. The results of these findings do not support the use of DTCs in bone marrow as a replacement for detection of CTCs from blood as a prognostic indicator in breast cancer. Future studies on larger cohorts of patients, however, might help to clarify this important issue.

There are also promising studies on CTCs as prognostic indicators in other tumor entities, including colorectal, lung, and prostate cancer (Tables 3,4,5), but an in-depth discussion of these data is beyond the scope of this review.43 Currently, cytokeratin 20 and carcinoembryonic antigen are the most commonly used markers in RT-PCR analyses of blood from patients with colorectal cancer (Table 3)—yielding detection rates of 10–60%, and prognostic relevance for overall survival and disease-free survival at least in some of the studies (Table 3). For the detection of CTCs derived from non-small-cell lung cancer, cytokeratin 19 and carcinoembryonic antigen expression is also frequently measured by RT-PCR; however, multigene RT-PCR assays have generated different results in terms of the prognostic relevance of these markers (Table 4). In prostate cancer, cytokeratins and prostate-specific antigen are usually used as markers for CTC detection, and the detection rates vary from 14 to 100% depending on the CTC assay and disease stage (Table 5). In general, RT-PCR assays for prostate-specific-antigen mRNA detection provided lower incidences of positive findings than prostate-specific membrane antigen RT-PCR, and patients with localized disease had less frequent positive findings than those with progressive disease (Table 5). Although the prognostic value needs to be confirmed in large, multicenter studies, the results of current reports are promising 
Monitoring of minimal residual disease
Many research groups are assessing the clinical value of CTC analyses for therapy monitoring. This monitoring has provided significant prognostic information in metastatic breast cancer. Cristofanilli et al.44 showed that the number of CTCs before treatment and at the first follow-up visit after initiation of therapy is an independent predictor of progression-free and overall survival in patients with metastatic breast cancer. Previously published data indicate that the absence or presence of CTCs in the peripheral blood of patients with metastatic cancer at any time during therapy is a direct reflection of the patient's response, or lack of response, respectively, to therapy,17 and seems to be superior to conventional imaging methods (such as radiologic assessment, including CT) for response evaluation.22,45 Despite these promising data, ASCO guidelines have stated that even the use of the FDA-cleared test for CTCs (CellSearch®, Johnson & Johnson) in patients with metastatic breast cancer cannot be recommended until further validation confirms the clinical value of this test.46 The clinical use of CTC measurements in patients with metastatic breast cancer is now being prospectively addressed in a randomized trial, SWOG S0500, led by the Southwest Oncology Group.47 This trial is expecting to enroll 500 patients with metastatic breast cancer, and it aims to determine whether patients with elevated CTC levels after 3 weeks of first-line chemotherapy show an improved overall survival and progression-free survival when changing to an alternative chemotherapy regimen at the next course, rather than waiting for clinical evidence of progressive disease. All patients will undergo blood collection before their first course of first-line chemotherapy to determine baseline CTC counts. Patients with a high risk of early progression (≥5 CTCs per 7.5 ml blood after completing one course of chemotherapy) will be stratified according to human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status and disease-type (bone-only versus measurable disease), and will be randomly allocated to one of two treatment arms: to continue their current chemotherapy regimen or switch to a different chemotherapy regimen. All patients who receive hormonal therapy or biological therapy and chemotherapy will continue to receive these therapies regardless of CTC levels.

The real challenge of DTC/CTC technologies is to monitor minimal residual disease in patients without signs of overt metastases. Pierga et al.48 monitored CTC counts in 118 patients with large operable or locally advanced breast cancer before and after primary systemic chemotherapy. In this phase II trial (REMAGUS 02), after four cycles of epirubicin–cyclophosphamide, patients were randomly allocated to four cycles of docetaxel with or without trastuzumab for patients with HER2-positive tumors, and docetaxel with or without celecoxib for patients with HER2-negative tumors. The authors showed that the presence of CTCs after a short follow-up time of 18 months was an independent prognostic factor for short metastasis-free survival.48 Interestingly, they did not find a significant correlation for response of the primary tumor to chemotherapy, which is usually used as an indicator for treatment response. Pachmann et al.23 analyzed data from 91 patients with nonmetastatic primary breast cancer, and reported that a greater than 10-fold increase in CTC counts compared with marginal changes in CTC numbers, and marginal changes compared with decreased CTC numbers at the end of adjuvant chemotherapy (12 different therapy schedules applied) were correlated with significantly reduced relapse-free survival of patients (P <0.01).23

Follow-up analyses of two other German trials using CellSearch® (Johnson & Johnson) technology—the GeparQuattro trial, which focused on primary systemic chemotherapy with or without trastuzumab, and the SUCCESS trial, which focused on adjuvant chemotherapy—are still ongoing, and will show whether the observed decreases in CTC rates49,50 will be associated with an improved survival rate. Preliminary results from the translational research project of the SUCCESS trial, in which blood samples from 1,500 patients with node-positive and high-risk node-negative breast cancer (before and after adjuvant taxane-based chemotherapy) were analyzed, demonstrated a prognostic relevance of CTCs in about 10% of patients after chemotherapy.50 In patients treated within the GeparQuattro trial, CTCs were detected in about 20% of patients before neoadjuvant chemotherapy, and in 10% of patients after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. This study incorporated three chemotherapy arms and trastuzumab treatment for patients with HER2-positive primary tumors. Whether CTC detection in the context of this study will have prognostic relevance will need to be demonstrated in follow-up observations of these patients.49

As most DTCs and CTCs are in a noncycling state (that is, are negative for the proliferation marker Ki-67) at the time of primary diagnosis and surgery,35,51 adjuvant chemotherapy might have rather limited effects on these cells. Thus, the use of targeted therapies in addition to chemotherapy and radiotherapy might be a promising approach.52 In breast cancer, the HER2 proto-oncogene is the most predominant biological target for systemic therapy with targeted agents, and remarkable results have been observed in clinical trials with the use of trastuzumab.53 The detection of HER2 expression in DTCs/CTCs could enable a 'real-time' assessment of HER2 status during the clinical course of the disease. Several groups reported a striking discrepancy between the HER2-score of DTCs/CTCs and the corresponding primary tumor.54,55,56,57 Similarly, different results were published regarding the comparison of HER2 status between primary tumors and matched lymph node or distant metastases.58,59,60,61,62,63 Some preliminary reports on less than 10 matched cases indicated a high concordance rate of up to 100% between the HER2 status of primary tumors and brain metastases.62,63 A large study on 124 archival resected brain metastases demonstrated a higher incidence of HER2-overexpression (36.2%)60 than that previously described for primary breast tumors.64 Large studies with standardized techniques and matched samples of primary tumors and distant metastases from the same patients are needed to address this important issue. The detection of HER2-positive DTCs and CTCs was correlated to an unfavorable clinical outcome in breast and oesophageal cancer,54,55,65 and HER2 amplification can be acquired during tumor progression of the cancer.66,67 Assessment of the HER2 status in DTCs and CTCs might, therefore, add important information for the clinical management of patients with cancer.

Cancer dormancy and metastatic stem cells
Cancer dormancy
Many solid tumors undergo an extended period of 'dormancy', characterized by the presence of minimal residual disease over many years before overt metastases may eventually arise.68 For example, metastatic relapse in patients with breast cancer can occur more than 10 years after the diagnosis and resection of the primary tumor.69 As CTCs have been detected in patients with breast cancer free of overt metastases up to 22 years after primary tumor diagnosis,39 it can be speculated that many 'cured' cancer patients might harbor dormant tumor cells.

In 2007, Aquirre-Ghiso postulated two different states of 'cancer dormancy', tumor-cell dormancy and tumor mass dormancy (Figure 1).30 Tumor-cell dormancy occurs when single DTCs have entered a nonproliferative 'quiescent' state, whereas tumor-mass dormancy describes a stage where cancer cells are more active and proliferate but the growth of the tumor mass (that is, micrometastasis) is inhibited because an equal fraction of tumor cells undergo apoptosis. However, this conceptual framework is still under debate. At present, little is known about the factors that might have a role in the 'awakening' of dormant tumor cells that leads them into the dynamic phase of metastasis formation. As shown in Figure 2, the steady state that regulates dormancy might be disturbed by both changes in DTCs (for example, additional mutations or epigenetic modifications in genes controlling cell proliferation and apoptosis) and the surrounding microenvironment (for example, release of growth and angiogenic factors).
Tumor cells with stem cell properties (red cells) and without stem cell properties (blue cells) are released from the primary tumor into the blood circulation. These circulating tumor cells can reach distant tissue (for example, bone marrow). According to the stem-cell hypothesis, only (1) the disseminated tumor cells with stem-cell properties30, and (2) micrometastases established by these cells, can escape from dormancy and give rise to an overt metastasis. DTCs and micrometastases lacking stem-cell properties are unable to undergo this important transition. At each stage of the metastatic cascade, tumor cells can recirculate via the bloodstream into other distant organs. It can even be speculated that tumor cells might recirculate to the primary tumor site and contribute to local relapse as indicated by the correlation between DTCs detected in the bone marrow and local relapse.34 Abbreviation: DTC, disseminated tumor cell.
The escape from cancer dormancy and the onset of overt metastasis is thought to be regulated by a number of different factors and cellular processes supporting (arrow pointing upwards) or suppressing (arrow pointing downwards) metastatic progression, as shown on the left or right tip of the balance, respectively. Data from experimental studies on tumor dormancy include genes encoding the MKK4 and Kiss1 metastasis suppressors, as well as Bcl-xL and α5β1 integrin–fibronectin as apoptosis inhibitors.75,102 and stanniocalcins as survival factors.103 Analyses of bone marrow and blood from patients with cancer have reveled that upregulation or re-expression of HER2 and the urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) in DTCs could serve as a switch to interrupt dormancy.55,56,104,105 Abbreviations: DTC, disseminated tumor cell; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2.
The role of the immune system as a potentially important host component for controlling metastatic progression is still under debate. Koebel and coauthors70 highlighted the importance of immune surveillance for the process of tumor dormancy in an osteosarcoma mouse model. They showed that immunity can restrain cancer growth for extended time periods, called equilibrium. Escape and equilibrium are distinct. Whereas equilibrium represents a time of tumor cell persistence without expansion, escape is characterized by progressive tumor growth. Using another mouse model, Mahnke et al.71 reported that tumor-associated-antigen-specific memory CD8+ T cells could be adoptively transferred to tumor-inoculated T-cell-deficient nude mice, and showed the persistence of a high number of these cells in the bone marrow. The authors suggested that the bone marrow microenvironment has special features for the maintenance of tumor dormancy and immunological T-cell memory. In addition to the presence of vital growth factors and cytokines produced by stromal cells and the continuous presence of tumor-associated antigen, other characteristics of the bone marrow microenvironment, such as the microvasculature, might also contribute to the enrichment of memory T cells.71 By contrast, certain subsets of macrophages can support metastatic spread by facilitating angiogenesis and extracellular matrix breakdown and remodeling.72 Galon and coworkers provided indirect evidence that the immune system might control minimal residual disease in patients with cancer by demonstrating a strong positive correlation between T-cell activation and survival in patients with colon cancer, independent of primary tumor size and nodal status.73 However, the role of the immune system in dormancy control and metastatic progression has not been proved. In particular, the postulated interactions between dormant tumor cells and immune effector cells in patients with cancer are unknown.

Previously, Kaplan and coworkers demonstrated that bone-marrow-derived hematopoietic progenitor cells that express vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (VEGFR1) are able to travel to tumor-specific premetastatic sites and form cellular clusters before the onset of tumor cells—which makes VEGFR an interesting target in the clinical setting.74 Angiogenesis is the formation of a new blood supply from pre-existing vasculature, and is stimulated by an angiogenic 'switch' that occurs when the ratio of inducers to inhibitors tips in favor of inducers. There is ample preclinical evidence that the angiogenic switch is important for the escape from cancer dormancy and the subsequent formation of metastases.75 Using mouse models of pulmonary metastasis, Gao et al.76 identified bone-marrow-derived endothelial progenitor cells as critical regulators of this angiogenic switch.Nonetheless, information on the expression of angiogenic factors in DTCs/CTCs is sparse, with only one publication demonstrating frequent VEGF expression on CTCs (68% of total CTCs) in patients with metastatic breast cancer.77

Additional microenvironmental processes might influence the dormant state of DTCs and micrometastases. For example, during inflammation and wound healing a plethora of cytokines are released and some of these factors can induce the migration and growth of epithelial tumor cells.78 Interestingly, a gene-expression signature specific for wound healing predicted metastatic relapse in patients with breast cancer.79 Briefly, on the basis of gene expression profiles of fibroblasts, the investigators identified a stereotyped genomic expression program in response to serum exposure, which reflects the multifaceted role of fibroblasts in wound healing. These genes are expressed in tumors by the tumor cells themselves, by tumor-associated fibroblasts, or both. The transcriptional signature of the response of fibroblasts to serum provides a possible link between cancer progression and wound healing, as well as being a powerful predictor of the clinical course in several common carcinomas.

Cancer stem cells
Cancer stem cells or cancer-initiating cells are a rare, self-renewing population within the tumor mass, which also have a differentiation component and are required for initiation and maintenance of tumor growth.80,81 It is assumed that cancer stem cells can disseminate from the primary tumor to distant sites (Figure 1). This assumption is supported by the observation that primary tumor stem cells show an expression profile associated with metastatic relapse in patients with breast cancer.82 Moreover, expression of a new breast stem cell marker (ALDH1) was associated with poor clinical outcome in patients with breast cancer. Furthermore, in vivo experiments showed that only ALDH1 positive cells were able to form metastases in mice.83

What is the evidence that the founder cells of overt metastases (that is, 'metastatic stem cells') might be among the DTCs/CTCs detected by current methods (Figure 1)? Firstly, the presence of DTCs in bone marrow is significantly correlated with metastatic relapse.33 Secondly, most DTCs/CTCs are nonproliferating (that is, Ki-67 negative) and resistant to chemotherapy35,84,85 as postulated for cancer stem cells, and they can persist in the bone marrow of patients with breast cancer many years after primary surgery.68,86 Thirdly, subsets of DTCs/CTCs have a breast cancer stem-cell phenotype (for example, CD44+CD24−/low, cytokeratin 19+MUC1−, EpCAM+).21,87,88,89 Fourthly, the two stem cell factors, EGF and fibroblast growth factor 2, were required for the in vitro growth of DTCs obtained from the bone marrow of patients with cancer.90 Nevertheless, strong, direct evidence that some of the DTCs or CTCs detected in bone marrow or blood samples have cancer stem cell properties is still lacking. Future studies, including xenotransplantation of DTCs/CTCs into immunodeficient mice, are needed to demonstrate that these cells are the actual founder cells of overt metastases.

Numerous studies have shown that bone marrow is a common homing tissue for DTCs derived from various epithelial tumors, including breast, prostate, lung and colon cancer.1,33,91 Although DTCs might be present in other organs, bone marrow might serve as a reservoir of DTCs from where they might recirculate into other distant organs such as liver or lungs, where better growth conditions might exist. The observed correlation between DTCs in bone marrow and local relapse suggests that these cells might circulate back to the primary tumor site (Figure 1).34 Future research will show whether DTCs use the same bone marrow niches as normal stem cells92 to persist over many years in patients with cancer.68

Molecular properties of DTCs and CTCs
There are several studies on the molecular properties of DTCs and CTCs assessed by immunocytological and molecular analyses.1,91 DTCs in bone marrow frequently express EpCAM, urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor and the protease inducer extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer, which might be interesting additional therapeutic targets.67,93,94,95 Interestingly, downregulation of MHC class I antigens is frequent in DTCs,96 which might help these cells to escape T-lymphocyte mediated recognition. A gene-expression signature was identified in EpCAM-enriched cells from the bone marrow of patients with breast cancer after chemotherapy. Expression of the TWIST1 gene, which encodes a transcription factor pivotal for metastasis by promoting epithelial–mesenchymal transition,97 was present in this signature.98 TWIST1 expression was associated with distant metastases and local progression, even in pretreatment bone marrow samples, but was not observed in EpCAM-enriched cells of bone marrow from healthy volunteers.98

Genomic analysis at the single cell level has shown that DTCs65,99 and CTCs100 detected with anticytokeratin antibodies frequently display very heterogeneous tumor-specific aberrations, particularly in patients with early stage cancer without overt metastases. Maheswaran et al.101 detected the T790M mutation in EGFR—which confers drug resistance—in CTCs collected from patients with EGFR mutations treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors.Their study indicated that molecular analysis of DTCs and CTCs offers the possibility of monitoring changes in epithelial tumor genotypes during the course of treatment.

Conclusions
A substantial number of patients with DTCs survive without metastatic relapse, which indicates that additional molecular characterization of the biological potential of DTCs might be required to increase the diagnostic precision of DTC analysis. In view of the plethora of prognostic indicators—especially in breast cancer—monitoring of DTCs/CTCs from the bone marrow and peripheral blood during and after systemic adjuvant therapy might provide unique information for the clinical management of individual patients with cancer, and allow an early change in therapy years before the appearance of overt metastases signals incurability. There is an urgent need for biomarkers for real-time monitoring of the efficacy of systemic adjuvant therapy in individual patients, comparable to the use of the blood glucose test for directing insulin treatment of diabetes. At present, the success or failure of anticancer therapies is only assessed retrospectively by the absence or presence of overt metastases during the postoperative follow-up period. However, overt metastases are, in general, incurable by most current therapies.

The monitoring of DTCs/CTCs will provide new insights into the identification of tumor cells and selection of the appropriate biological therapies. New therapeutic modalities might include the conversion of the cancer into a controllable chronic disease by maintaining DTCs in a dormant state. Although there is overwhelming evidence that DTCs/CTCs correlate with poor prognosis, at this stage there is no experimental proof to support the hypothesis that EpCAM or cytokeratin-positive DTCs/CTCs are indeed the cells that initiate metastasis. Immunophenotyping and molecular studies show that the DTC/CTC population is highly heterogeneous and it can be assumed that only a small subset of these cells might be the founder cells of overt metastases. Cancer stem cells seem to have a high capacity to undergo epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and an increased capacity to disseminate to distant sites.28 Thus, DTCs might be enriched for stem cells, an assumption supported by Balic et al.88 who demonstrated that many DTCs show a CD44+/CD24− stem-cell phenotype. It is still unclear whether DTCs/CTCs detected by the current assays have self-renewal ability, the hallmark of stem cells.
How Cancer Arises
An explosion of research is uncovering
the long-hidden molecular underpinnings
of cancer—and suggesting new therapies
ow cancer develops is no
longer a mystery. During the
past two decades, investigators have made astonishing progress in
identifying the deepest bases of the process—those at the molecular level. These
discoveries are robust: they will survive
the scrutiny of future generations of researchers, and they will form the foundation for revolutionary approaches to
treatment. No one can predict exactly
when therapies targeted to the molecular alterations in cancer cells will find
wide use, given that the translation of
new understanding into clinical practice is complicated, slow and expensive.
But the effort is now under way.
In truth, the term “cancer” refers to
more than 100 forms of the disease. Almost every tissue in the body can spawn
malignancies; some even yield several
types. What is more, each cancer has
unique features. Still, the basic processes
that produce these diverse tumors appear to be quite similar. For that reason,
I will refer in this article to “cancer” in
generic terms, drawing on one or another type to illustrate the rules that seem
to apply universally.
The 30 trillion cells of the normal,
healthy body live in a complex, interdependent condominium, regulating one
another’s proliferation. Indeed, normal
cells reproduce only when instructed to
do so by other cells in their vicinity. Such
unceasing collaboration ensures that
each tissue maintains a size and architecture appropriate to the body’s needs.
Cancer cells, in stark contrast, violate
this scheme; they become deaf to the
usual controls on proliferation and follow their own internal agenda for reproduction. They also possess an even
more insidious property—the ability to
migrate from the site where they began,
invading nearby tissues and forming
masses at distant sites in the body. Tumors composed of such malignant cells
become more and more aggressive over
time, and they become lethal when they
disrupt the tissues and organs needed for
the survival of the organism as a whole.
This much is not new. But over the
past 20 years, scientists have uncovered
a set of basic principles that govern the
development of cancer. We now know
that the cells in a tumor descend from a
common ancestral cell that at one
point—usually decades before a tumor
becomes palpable—initiated a program
of inappropriate reproduction. Further,
the malignant transformation of a cell
comes about through the accumulation
of mutations in specific classes of the
genes within it. These genes provide the
key to understanding the processes at
the root of human cancer.
Genes are carried in the DNA molecules of the chromosomes in the cell nucleus. A gene specifies a sequence of
amino acids that must be linked together to make a particular protein; the protein then carries out the work of the
gene. When a gene is switched on, the
cell responds by synthesizing the encoded protein. Mutations in a gene can perturb a cell by changing the amounts or
the activities of the protein product.
Two gene classes, which together constitute only a small proportion of the full
genetic set, play major roles in triggering cancer. In their normal configuration, they choreograph the life cycle of
the cell—the intricate sequence of events
by which a cell enlarges and divides.
Proto-oncogenes encourage such growth,
whereas tumor suppressor genes inhibit
it. Collectively these two gene classes ac
The creation of a malignant tumor in epithelial tissue is depicted schematically below. Epithelial cancers are the most common malignancies and
are called carcinomas. The mass seen here emerges as a result of mutations
in four genes, but the number of genes involved in real tumors can vary.
count for much of the uncontrolled cell
proliferation seen in human cancers.
When mutated, proto-oncogenes can
become carcinogenic oncogenes that
drive excessive multiplication. The mutations may cause the proto-oncogene to
yield too much of its encoded growthstimulatory protein or an overly active
form of it. Tumor suppressor genes, in
contrast, contribute to cancer when they
are inactivated by mutations. The resulting loss of functional suppressor proteins deprives the cell of crucial brakes
that prevent inappropriate growth.
For a cancerous tumor to develop,
mutations must occur in half a dozen or
more of the founding cell’s growth-controlling genes. Altered forms of yet other classes of genes may also participate
in the creation of a malignancy, by specifically enabling a proliferating cell to
become invasive or capable of spreading (metastasizing) throughout the body.
Signaling Systems Go Awry
Vital clues to how mutated protooncogenes and tumor suppressor
genes contribute to cancer came from
studying the roles played within the cell
by the normal counterparts of these
genes. After almost two decades of research, we now view the normal genetic functions with unprecedented clarity
and detail.
Many proto-oncogenes code for proteins in molecular “bucket brigades” that
relay growth-stimulating signals from
outside the cell deep into its interior. The
growth of a cell becomes deregulated
when a mutation in one of its proto-oncogenes energizes a critical growth-stimulatory pathway, keeping it continuously active when it should be silent.
These pathways within a cell receive
and process growth-stimulatory signals
transmitted by other cells in a tissue.
Such cell-to-cell signaling usually begins
when one cell secretes growth factors.
After release, these proteins move
through the spaces between cells and
bind to specific receptors—antennalike
molecules—on the surface of other cells
nearby. Receptors span the outer membrane of the target cells, so that one end
protrudes into the extracellular space,
and the other end projects into the cell’s
interior, its cytoplasm. When a growthstimulatory factor attaches to a receptor, the receptor conveys a proliferative
signal to proteins in the cytoplasm.
These downstream proteins then emit
stimulatory signals to a succession of
other proteins, in a chain that ends in
the heart of the cell, its nucleus. Within
the nucleus, proteins known as transcription factors respond by activating
a cohort of genes that help to usher the
cell through its growth cycle.
Some oncogenes force cells to overproduce growth factors. Sarcomas and
gliomas (cancers, respectively, of connective tissues and nonneuronal brain
cells) release excessive amounts of platelet-derived growth factor. A number of other cancer types secrete too much
transforming growth factor alpha. These
factors act, as usual, on nearby cells,
but, more important, they may also
turn back and drive proliferation of the
same cells that just produced them.
Researchers have also identified oncogenic versions of receptor genes. The
aberrant receptors specified by these oncogenes release a flood of proliferative
signals into the cell cytoplasm even when
no growth factors are present to urge
the cell to replicate. For instance, breast
cancer cells often display Erb-B2 receptor molecules that behave in this way.
Still other oncogenes in human tumors
perturb parts of the signal cascade found
in the cytoplasm. The best understood
example comes from the ras family of
oncogenes. The proteins encoded by
normal ras genes transmit stimulatory
signals from growth factor receptors to
other proteins farther down the line.
The proteins encoded by mutant ras
genes, however, fire continuously, even
when growth factor receptors are not
prompting them. Hyperactive Ras proteins are found in about a quarter of all
human tumors, including carcinomas
of the colon, pancreas and lung. (Carcinomas are by far the most common
forms of cancer; they originate in epithelial cells, which line the body cavities.
Abstract
Breast cancer is the most frequent malignancy in women worldwide and is curable in ~70–80% of patients with early-stage, non-metastatic disease. Advanced breast cancer with distant organ metastases is considered incurable with currently available therapies. On the molecular level, breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease; molecular features include activation of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2, encoded by ERBB2), activation of hormone receptors (oestrogen receptor and progesterone receptor) and/or BRCA mutations. Treatment strategies differ according to molecular subtype. Management of breast cancer is multidisciplinary; it includes locoregional (surgery and radiation therapy) and systemic therapy approaches. Systemic therapies include endocrine therapy for hormone receptor-positive disease, chemotherapy, anti-HER2 therapy for HER2-positive disease, bone stabilizing agents, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors for BRCA mutation carriers and, quite recently, immunotherapy. Future therapeutic concepts in breast cancer aim at individualization of therapy as well as at treatment de-escalation and escalation based on tumour biology and early therapy response. Next to further treatment innovations, equal worldwide access to therapeutic advances remains the global challenge in breast cancer care for the future.
Introduction
Breast cancer is the most frequent malignancy in women and is a heterogeneous disease on the molecular level. Over the past 10–15 years, treatment concepts have evolved to take this heterogeneity into account, with emphasis being placed on more biologically-directed therapies and treatment de-escalation to reduce the adverse effects of treatment. Despite the inherent molecular heterogeneity, which is a driving principle of modern-day treatments, some features such as the impact of locoregional tumour burden or metastatic patterns are shared and influence therapy. Early breast cancer — that is, cancer that is contained in the breast or that has only spread to the axillary lymph nodes — is considered curable. Improvements in multimodal therapy have led to increasing chances for cure in ~70–80% of patients. By contrast, advanced (metastatic) disease is not considered curable using currently available therapeutic options. However, advanced breast cancer is a treatable disease, for which the main goals of therapy are to prolong survival and control symptoms with low treatment-associated toxicity to maintain or improve quality of life (that is, improved quality-adjusted life expectancy).

The two major pillars of breast cancer management are locoregional treatment and systemic therapy; the histological and molecular characteristics of breast cancer largely influence treatment decisions. The molecular alterations that drive breast carcinogenesis are many, and several classifications have been developed to group tumours accordingly. The intrinsic classification of Perou and Sorlie1, reported in 2000, distinguished four subtypes of breast cancer: luminal A and luminal B (expressing the oestrogen receptor (ER)), basal-like and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-enriched (without ER expression). This classification shifted clinical management of breast cancer from being based on tumour burden to biology-centred approaches. Currently, clinical practice typically uses a surrogate classification of five subtypes on the basis of histological and molecular characteristics (Fig. 1). Tumours expressing ER and/or progesterone receptor (PR) are considered hormone receptor-positive breast cancers, whereas tumours that do not express ER, PR or HER2 are triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Importantly, treatment by a specialized multidisciplinary team improves survival and quality of life for patients with early and metastatic breast cancer, as does treatment according to high-quality guidelines. Establishment of specialized breast cancer centres is a major priority worldwide, and is supported by the European Parliament2.
All breast cancers arise in the terminal duct lobular units (the functional unit of the breast) of the collecting duct. The histological and molecular characteristics have important implications for therapy, and several classifications on the basis of molecular and histological characteristics have been developed. The histological subtypes described here (top right) are the most frequent subtypes of breast cancer; ductal carcinoma (now referred to as ‘no special type’ (NST)) and lobular carcinoma are the invasive lesions; their preinvasive counterparts are ductal carcinoma in situ and lobular carcinoma in situ (or lobular neoplasia), respectively. The intrinsic subtypes of Perou and Sorlie1 are based on a 50-gene expression signature (PAM50)321. The surrogate intrinsic subtypes are typically used clinically and are based on histology and immunohistochemistry expression of key proteins: oestrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) and the proliferation marker Ki67. Tumours expressing ER and/or PR are termed ‘hormone receptor-positive’; tumours not expressing ER, PR and HER2 are called ‘triple-negative’. The relative placement of the boxes align with the characteristics (for example, proliferation and grade) in green. −, negative; +, positive. GES, gene expression signature. aESR1 mutations induced by aromatase inhibitor targeted therapy. bArtefact; expression of normal breast components due to low tumour cellularity.

As breast cancer is a global problem, major emphasis needs to be put on diminishing worldwide disparities in access to diagnosis, multimodal treatment and novel drugs. In this Primer, we provide state-of-the-art information on the biology, diagnosis and treatment of early and metastatic breast cancer, emphasizing the necessity for multidisciplinary management of this heterogeneous disease.

Epidemiology
Demographics, incidence and mortality
In 2018, an estimated 2.1 million women were newly diagnosed with breast cancer, approximately one new case diagnosed every 18 seconds; additionally, 626,679 women with breast cancer died3. The global incidence of breast cancer has been rising with annual increases of 3.1%, beginning with 641,000 cases in 1980 and increasing to >1.6 million in 2010 (ref.4); this trend is likely to continue. Indeed, the global cancer burden in women is increasing in countries regardless of income level, owing to population growth and an ageing population. The female population accounts for 49.5% of the global population, and they form a larger proportion of the population >60 years of age. Furthermore, the epidemiology of advanced breast cancer is a research priority as, in most countries, the number of patients with advanced disease is unknown; cancer registries mostly track diagnosis and deaths but not relapses. One study estimated that, in 2017, ~160,000 patients live with advanced-stage breast cancer in the United States alone5. The death rates also vary among subtypes of breast cancer with HER2-positive disease associated with a higher death rate, followed by the TNBC, luminal A and luminal B subtypes6.

Incidence varies worldwide, with higher incidence in high-income regions (92 per 100,000 in North America) than in lower income regions (27 per 100,000 in middle Africa and eastern Asia)7,8. These patterns reflect both the risk factors and the availability and utility of mammography (and, therefore, detected breast cancers); the highest breast cancer incidence is in North America, Australia, New Zealand and northern and western Europe. Furthermore, in high-income countries, breast cancer is often diagnosed at an early stage and the prognosis is usually good. However, in low- and middle-income countries, breast cancer is often diagnosed at a later stage and is, accordingly, associated with poorer survival9 — a fact that is reflected in the mortality statistics. Breast cancer mortality is usually higher in many low- and middle-income countries, such as those in sub-Saharan Africa10 and developing Asian countries11, despite their lower incidence, due to delayed presentation, late stage at diagnosis and limited access to treatment. Several studies have also shown that breast cancer presents earlier in Asian women (typically 40–50 years of age) than in their western counterparts (typically 60–70 years of age)12,13,14,15,16,17. In addition, patients in developing countries who are diagnosed with breast cancer are ~10 years younger than those in developed countries. The proportion of young patients (<35 years of age) varies from ~10% in developed countries to up to 25% in developing Asian countries15. The biology of the tumour also varies by ethnicity, which has implications for the difference in mortality17. For example, African and African-American women had the highest rates of TNBC compared with any other ethnic group. They also had higher rates of metastatic disease, and the highest rates of poorly differentiated or undifferentiated grade among all subtypes, all of which are associated with lower survival18. Additionally, metastatic breast cancer represents 9% of diagnoses among non-Hispanic black women compared with 5–6% of diagnoses in other ethnic groups. Regarding the survival gains in patients with advanced disease during the years 1975–2013, the 5-year cause-specific survival of non-Hispanic white women was higher than that of other ethnic groups, particularly non-Hispanic black women (19–37% compared with 16–26%)19,20. This pattern is multifactorial and involves genetic predisposition, lifestyle and other environmental factors.

Genetic predisposition
Approximately 10% of breast cancers are inherited and associated with a family history21, although this varies frequently by ethnicity and across countries in the context of early-onset, bilateral and/or TNBC. Individuals with a first-degree relative who had breast cancer have an elevated relative risk (RR) of 3 of early-onset breast cancer (before 35 years of age)22. However, a family history of breast cancer is associated with an ‘erratic’ individual risk of breast cancer composed of different variables, including the size of the family and environmental factors. To determine the family’s risk, models such as the family history score have been developed23.

Mutations in two high-penetrance tumour suppressor genes, BRCA1 (17q21) and BRCA2 (13q13), whose proteins are involved in DNA repair through homologous repair24, show an autosomal-dominant inheritance pattern (loss of function > missense). BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations are associated with an average cumulative risk of developing breast cancer by the age of 80 years of 72% and 69%, respectively25; the relative risk of breast cancer in men (Box 1) harbouring BRCA2 mutations is 6%26,27. More than 2,000 BRCA gene alterations have been described (mutations and large rearrangements), but only few have been found repeatedly in unrelated families, for example, founder mutations in Ashkenazi Jewish families (BRCA1 185delAG or BRCA2 6174delT) or Icelandic families (BRCA2 999del5). The prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations varies between ethnic groups, being lower in the Asian group (0.5%) and higher in the Ashkenazi group (10.2%) in a US nationwide study28. Germline BRCA testing will now be performed as a companion diagnostic in patients with metastatic breast cancer29 given the availability of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors, which prolong progression-free survival (PFS) and improve quality of life30,31, as a targeted therapy for BRCA mutation carriers in HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer32,33.

Several syndromes related to germline mutations of genes involved in DNA repair and maintaining genomic integrity have been shown to be linked to, to a lesser degree, the inherited breast cancer risk (Table 1). Next-generation sequencing has enabled panels of genes to be screened — beyond BRCA1 and BRCA2 — to determine the inherited breast cancer risk34,35,36, and include ATM, CHEK2, PALB2, PTEN, STK11 and TP53 (ref.37).
Lifestyle and other environmental factors
Breast cancer epidemiology pattern differences across countries are further compounded by cultural factors, lifestyle factors and national awareness campaigns. The increase in breast cancer incidence between 1980 and the late 1990s is likely due to changes in reproductive factors, with advanced maternal age for first pregnancy, and an increase in awareness and mammography screening38,39. Several explanations have been offered as to why early pregnancy and high levels of oestrogen during pregnancy reduce breast cancer risk. The proposed mechanisms include altered sensitivity of the mammary gland to later hormonal exposures40; reduction in the number of stem or progenitor cells and, consequently, elimination of targets for malignant transformation41; and changes in gene expression patterns resulting in reduced proliferation and increased differentiation42. Other risk factors for breast cancer include early menarche, lack of breast feeding and late-onset menopause.

It has been estimated that ~20% of breast cancers worldwide can be attributed to modifiable risk factors, including obesity, physical inactivity and alcohol use, offering the potential for reduction in the disease burden by promoting a healthy lifestyle43. For example, each 10 g (~1 drink) of alcohol consumed daily by an adult woman will lead to a 7–10% increase in breast cancer risk; this association is observed in both premenopausal and postmenopausal women44,45,46. Furthermore, the influence of central obesity on breast cancer risk and survival has been studied; current evidence suggests a stronger adverse effect of obesity on breast cancer risk and survival in women of Asian ancestry than in non-Hispanic white women in the United States and Europe47. For African American and non-white Hispanic women, the strength of the associations seems to be comparable with that of non-Hispanic white women, particularly when accounting for subtype and menopausal status48. Central obesity seems to have a stronger influence on breast cancer risk in African-American women than general adiposity as measured by body mass index (BMI)47.

Currently, 18% of premenopausal women in the United States have elevated BMI and breast density and may benefit from lifestyle modifications involving weight loss and exercise49. However, this benefit is not limited to premenopausal women, especially when the Asian breast cancer population is being studied. For example, it was noted that postmenopausal Asian women whose BMI increased ≥5.0 were significantly more likely to develop breast cancer than those with a stable BMI (defined as a change in BMI of ±2.5). Additionally, postmenopausal women with abdominal circumference ≥90 cm were significantly more likely to develop breast cancer than those with abdominal circumference <70 cm50. Among postmenopausal women with BMI ≥20, those with high (≥6.5) glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) were more likely to develop breast cancer than those with low (<5.5) HbA1c. Thus, breast cancer incidence, obesity and increased BMI are associated in postmenopausal Asian women50.

The possibility that the use of hormonal contraceptives may increase the risk of breast cancer has been raised for many years51. Two recent papers showed a statistically significant increase in breast cancer with use of hormonal contraception, even contemporary lose-dose formulations52,53. Thus, counselling may be needed to encourage women of child-bearing age to adopt lifestyle habits that may reduce the cancer risk.

Survivors
In 2018, an estimated 6.8 million women worldwide survived breast cancer after being diagnosed within the previous 5 years3. Unfortunately, and because most cancer registries only record the incidence and mortality but not the date of relapse, it is unknown how many of these 6.8 million women are living with metastatic disease and how many are cancer-free survivors. Meeting the long-term medical and psychosocial needs of survivors in low- and middle-income countries is particularly difficult due to limited resources — these issues are attracting global attention54. The emergent issues include but are not limited to common adverse effects over long periods after cancer treatment, loss of strength, sexual dysfunction, bone health, and physical and mental health concerns55,56,57,58,59.

Mechanisms/pathophysiology
The exact mechanism by which breast cancer is initiated is unknown; however, much effort has been made to molecularly characterize breast cancer and delineate its formation and progression. At the cell of origin level, the clonal evolution model (in which mutations accumulate, epigenetic changes in tumour cells occur and the ‘fittest’ cells survive) and the cancer stem cell model (in which only the precursor cancer cells initiate and sustain progression) are both implicated, and further complicated by the fact that cancer stem cells may also evolve in a clonal fashion60. At the morphological level, there is a continuum of lesions and genetic modifications from normal glands to cancer (Fig. 1). At the molecular level, there is evidence showing that breast cancer evolves along two divergent molecular pathways of progression, mainly related to ER expression, and tumour grade and proliferation (described in the intrinsic classification). Furthermore, the identification of breast cancer susceptibility genes has shed the light on some aspects of the pathogenesis of both sporadic and inherited breast cancer.

The first pathway —the low-grade-like pathway — is characterized by gain of 1q, loss 16q, infrequent amplification of 17q12 and a gene expression signature (GES) with a majority of genes associated with the ER phenotype, diploid or near diploid karyotypes and low tumour grade. The luminal A group and to some extent the luminal B group fall into this pathway. The second pathway — the high-grade-like pathway — is characterized by loss of 13q, gain of chromosomal region 11q13, amplification of 17q12 (containing ERBB2, encoding HER2) and an expression signature of genes involved in the cell cycle and cellular proliferation61. Tumours composed of intermediate to high grade, including HER2-positive tumours and TNBC, fall into this pathway62.

Molecular alterations
The most frequently mutated and/or amplified genes in the tumour cells are TP53 (41% of tumours), PIK3CA (30%), MYC (20%), PTEN (16%), CCND1 (16%), ERBB2 (13%), FGFR1 (11%) and GATA3 (10%), as reported in a series of early breast cancers63 (Fig. 2). These genes encode cell-cycle modulators that are either repressed (for example, p53) or activated (for example, cyclin D1), sustaining proliferation and/or inhibiting apoptosis, inhibiting oncogenic pathways that are activated (MYC, HER2 and FGFR1) or inhibiting elements that are no longer repressed (PTEN). The majority of the mutations affecting 100 putative breast cancer drivers are extremely rare64, therefore, most breast cancers are caused by multiple, low-penetrant mutations that act cumulatively. Luminal A tumours have a high prevalence of PIK3CA mutations (49%), whereas a high prevalence of TP53 mutations is a hallmark of basal-like tumours (84%). For TNBC, different molecular drivers underline its subtypes (Box 2). At the metastatic stage, specific predictive alterations, such as PIK3CA mutations, can be easily detected non-invasively in the plasma in circulating tumour DNA rather than on tumour biopsy; nevertheless, depending on the technology used, the level of sensitivity may vary65.The Cancer Genome Atlas data on breast tumour DNA copy number and somatic mutations were used to identify the frequency of each genetic alteration across 792 patients with breast cancer (all subtypes)322. Each gene is shaded according to the overall frequency of alteration. Orange indicates a high level of amplification and/or likely gain-of-function mutations; blue represents homozygous deletions and/or likely loss-of-function mutations. Figure adapted from ref.323, Springer Nature Limited.Epigenetic alterations are involved in breast carcinogenesis and progression. In breast cancer, genes can be either globally hypomethylated (leading to gene activation, upregulation of oncogenes and chromosomal instability) or, less frequently, focally (locus-specific) hypermethylated (leading to gene repression and genetic instability due to the silencing of DNA repair genes). Other epigenetic mechanisms involve histone tail modifications by DNA methylation, inducing chromatin structure changes to silence gene expression and nucleosomal remodelling. These changes are reversible, enzyme-mediated and potentially targetable66. For example, in luminal-like breast cancer cell lines, inhibition of histone deacetylase with specific inhibitors such as vorinostat67 or chidamide68 can reverse resistance to endocrine therapy via inhibition of the resistance pathway driven by epidermal growth factor receptor signalling. Recently, a phase III trial in metastatic luminal breast cancer showed the superiority of a treatment combining chidamide with endocrine therapy (namely, the aromatase inhibitor exemestane) to exemestane alone69.Hormone receptors
The major risk factors for sporadic breast cancer are linked to hormone exposure. Oestrogen is clearly a promoter of breast cancer, through its binding of the ER located in the nucleus (encoded by ESR1), which is a ligand-activated transcription factor. Hormones stimulate breast development during puberty, menstrual cycles and pregnancy (the only period when the organ is functional). During the menstrual cycles, an imbalance between oestrogen and progesterone enhances cell proliferation and may cause DNA damage accumulation. With the repetition of the process at each cycle, a defective repair process can occur, leading to mutations in pre-malignant, and then in malignant, cells. At this stage, oestrogen stimulates the growth of these cells and the proliferation of stromal cells that support cancer development. When activated by ligand binding, the ER can modulate gene expression by interacting with oestrogen response elements located in the promoter region of specific genes. Extracellular signals can also stimulate the expression and activation of the ER in the absence of oestrogen70. Furthermore, the ER can also interact directly with proteins, such as growth factor receptors, to enhance gene expression related to cell proliferation and survival71. Thus, drugs blocking the effects of oestrogen on the mammary gland, such as tamoxifen, or drugs that block the production of oestrogen, such as aromatase inhibitors, have major roles in the treatment of hormone-sensitive breast cancer. As oestrogen interacts with bone, aromatase inhibitors can also cause osteoporosis (as menopause does). By contrast, tamoxifen has oestrogen-like effects on the bone, thereby preventing osteoporosis72.

HER2
ERBB2 is amplified in 13–15% of breast cancers, causing an activation of the HER2 pathway. HER2 is, with epidermal growth factor receptor (HER1), HER3 and HER4, a member of the human epidermal growth factor family. These proteins comprise an extracellular ligand-binding domain, a transmembrane domain and a tyrosine kinase intracellular catalytic domain. HER2 activation occurs through dimerization after ligand binding, although no ligand specific for HER2 has been identified. HER2 signalling activates proliferation, cell survival, metastasis and adhesion through different pathways such as the RAS pathway and the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)–protein kinase B (AKT)–mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. Targeting HER2 has proven to be effective in HER2-positive breast cancers that are defined by protein overexpression or gene amplification (see below, Management).

Immune involvement
Breast cancer develops in a complex microenvironment comprising several benign cell types and the extracellular matrix (which provides mechanical support for the tumour and enables cellular interaction in a paracrine fashion). The most abundant cell type is cancer-associated fibroblasts, but the breast cancer microenvironment also contains cells of leukocyte lineage (including lymphocytes, macrophages and myeloid-derived stromal cells), most of which are involved in the immune response (Fig. 3)73. Immunogenicity of breast cancer varies between the molecular subtypes, being highest in TNBC and HER2-positive tumours and lower in luminal A and luminal B subtypes74,75. Moreover, the response to neoadjuvant treatment and the prognosis of breast cancer are positively influenced by the amount of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes, which reflects the intensity of the immune response within the tumour bed76,77.The immune reaction to breast cancer is initiated by the neoantigens expressed by tumour cells, encoded by altered genes and presented by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) on major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) or MHC II molecules. Neoantigen presentation results in activation of CD8+ (cytotoxic) and CD4+ (helper) T cells. CD8+ T cells are the main effector cell of the anti-tumour immune response; their activation (principally through the T cell receptor (TCR)) results in release of the cytolytic molecules perforin and granzyme B, which directly induce tumour cell lysis. The anti-tumour action of CD8+ T cells is amplified by cytokines secreted from CD4+ T cells, namely IFNγ, IL-2 and tumour necrosis factor (TNF). Activated CD8+ T cells also upregulate expression of Fas ligand (FasL) and TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL; also known as TNFSF10) on their membrane, which induce apoptotic pathways to kill tumour cells. Cancer cells elicit an innate immune response, comprising natural killer (NK) and NK T cells that are capable of direct tumour cell killing. Malignant cells can suppress the immune response by expressing immune checkpoint regulators (for example, cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) and programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1)), which are upregulated by effector T cells as a consequence of chronic exposure to tumour antigens (T cell exhaustion). The reduced anti-tumour immune response by upregulated immune checkpoint molecules establishes a pro-tumour microenvironment, which is further enriched by recruitment of immunosuppressive cells, T regulatory (Treg) cells and myeloid-derived stromal cells (MDSCs). Treg cells, which inhibit activation of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, are induced by tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs) and by tumour-secreted and cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF)-secreted factors, such as transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ). In addition, TAMs and Treg cells inhibit APCs via IL-10 secretion, inducing a tolerogenic state of APCs. MDSCs are recruited to the tumour bed by tumour-secreted factors, inhibit trafficking of T cells to the tumour bed and inhibit effector T cell activation by upregulating 2,3-indoleamine-dioxygenase (IDO) and arginase expression, enzymes involved in the T cell nutrient depletion. The secretome of the pro-tumour microenvironment, containing factors that stimulate angiogenesis and invasion (such as vascular-endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs)) also contribute to tumour immune escape and propagation. CCL22, CC-chemokine ligand 22; CXCL16, CXC-chemokine ligand 16; NOS, nitric oxide synthase; PD-1, programmed cell death 1; RANKL, receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB (RANK) ligand; TH1 cell, type 1 T helper cell. Adapted from ref.75, CC-BY-4.0The immune microenvironment influences the development and progression of breast cancer according to immune surveillance and immune editing principles. In the early phase of carcinogenesis, the immune microenvironment exerts mostly anti-tumour action, via the cytokine milieu derived from activated CD8+ and CD4+ T cells. By contrast, once a tumour becomes invasive, the microenvironment cell composition, including cancer-associated fibroblasts and cytokine content, are tumour-promoting, ‘hacked’ by breast cancer cells78,79,80.

Tumour biology and metastatic disease
The intrinsic classification (Fig. 1) influences the profile (timing, sites) of metastatic disease. Luminal A tumours tend to relapse late (after 5 years of first presentation) and have a tropism for bone and lymph nodes (as do luminal B, HER2-negative tumours). TNBCs are prone to early recurrences (within 2–3 years of first presentation) and tend to form visceral (lung) and brain metastases. Since the era of anti-HER2 targeted therapy, HER2-positive breast cancers show better prognosis, but they escape therapy through brain metastasis81.

Breast cancers that are diagnosed as metastatic at first presentation (de novo) account for 25–28% of metastatic breast cancers5,82. Their proportion varies with the age at diagnosis from 5.1% for women <40 years of age up to 34.3% if aged >75 years (data from France83). The true number of metastatic breast cancers x years after initial presentation, at sites and/or organs outside the local initial breast tumour area and regional nodes (including infra-clavicular and supra-clavicular ipsilateral lymph nodes), depends on several factors including age, presence of mass screening, quality of initial local treatment and access to drugs and innovations (such as precision radiation therapy for brain metastases or access to clinical trials)5,82. In western countries, the proportion of patients who experience metastatic recurrence is probably 20–30%. Recurrence and disease-free survival (DFS) are measured after the completion of the initial treatment.

Tumour features that lead to metastasis in breast cancer are not well known. Additionally, although some researchers are attempting to find interventions to prevent metastatic recurrence (such as aspirin and metformin), the results are as yet mostly inconclusive.

Tumour molecular evolution
The majority (~80%) of the driver alterations of the primary breast cancer are conserved in the metastatic sites. However, different metastatic sites may harbour ‘private’ mutations (including new drivers), resulting in subclonal diversification and discrepancies between the biology of breast cancers at different metastatic sites within an individual patient. Such alterations occur late, and some alterations are subsequent to treatment pressure; for example, ESR1 mutations can arise after aromatase inhibitor treatment (which targets oestrogen synthesis) whereas others might be ‘true’ metastatic precursors. Indeed, mutations of ESR1 that affect the ligand-binding domain are detected in the metastatic tissue or the plasma in 23–40% of women with breast cancer who progress after prior successful aromatase inhibitor treatment. This acquired resistance phenomenon does not seem to influence sensitivity to fulvestrant (a selective ER degrader) but does affect sensitivity to aromatase inhibitors and is dependent on the type of mutation observed (for example, D538G mutation is worse than Y537S)84. During metastatic development, the different deposits exhibit linear, parallel or polyclonal evolutionary pathways from the primary tumour, showing different genetic and epigenetic evolution. This process is highly complex and still poorly understood85. Liquid biopsy with an evaluation of circulating tumour DNA profiles can reflect the clonal heterogeneity, but this approach may lack sensitivity86.

Subclonal diversification may explain the discrepancies observed between primary breast cancers and metastatic breast cancer for the expression of ER (~20% discordance), PR (~33% discordance) and HER2 (~8% discordance). These molecular targets are more frequently lost than newly acquired (for instance, 13% of HER2-positive primary tumours generate HER2-negative metastases whereas only 5% of HER2-negative primary tumours generate HER2-positive metastases)87, which affects treatment strategies.

Diagnosis, screening and prevention
Screening
Population screening aims at finding early disease for which there is effective treatment, using a test that is non-invasive, accurate and acceptable to end-users. Population screening for breast cancer using mammography is a secondary prevention strategy aimed at detecting the disease at an early stage to enable effective treatment. Collectively, mammography (low-dose X-ray imaging of the breasts; Fig. 4) randomized controlled trials have provided high-level evidence that population screening significantly reduces mortality from breast cancer by a relative risk of 20% for those invited to screening88. Efficacy of mammography screening is age-dependent and is most evident in women 50–69 years of age, with weaker evidence of benefit in those outside this range89. Observational studies conducted in real-world screening practice provide similar evidence on the benefit of mammography screening to randomized controlled trials, although estimates of effect are heterogeneous90,91. Given that screening improves early detection of breast cancer, an expected benefit is a reduction in more intensive treatment, for example lower mastectomy rates. However, population-level studies have shown conflicting reports regarding the effect of screening on treatment92,93.A postmenopausal woman 53 years of age with no family history and no clinical findings underwent routine breast screening with mammography, which detected a lesion in the right breast (panel a, cranio-caudal view (left) and mediolateral oblique view (right)). The images were also acquired with digital breast tomosynthesis, which showed a small spiculated lesion in the lower inner quadrant (panel b, mediolateral oblique view). The lesion was investigated with ultrasonography (panel c), and biopsy confirmed an invasive ductal carcinoma on histology. MRI showed the enhancing spiculated mass (panel d). The tumour is indicated within the dashed lines in each panel.Mammography screening has been implemented in the majority of developed health systems (for example, in the United States, United Kingdom, Europe and Australia), although the organization of screening services and uptake (participation) by women vary considerably between countries94. Southeast Asian countries implemented mammography screening later than European countries and several Asian countries have only partial screening programmes94. Nations with limited resources (for example, sub-Saharan African and east African countries), where women often present with more-advanced cancers, have not implemented mammography screening and this reflects the generally limited health services infrastructure.

Debate is ongoing regarding whether the harms associated with mammography screening outweigh its potential benefit in reducing breast cancer deaths, with different recommendations on population screening by various agencies (Box 3). The most frequent harm from mammography screening is false-positive recall, which varies according to screening intensity and the healthcare setting91,95. Overdiagnosis, an epidemiologically-proven ‘excess’ of screen-detected breast cancer that would not have emerged clinically in the individual’s lifetime, is inherently and methodologically challenging to quantify, and is the most serious harm from screening because it would likely lead to overtreatment88,90,91,95,96.

Women at higher risk of breast cancer than the average (population) risk owing to predisposing genetic mutations (Table 1) are generally advised to have risk-tailored screening, which may include more frequent screening and/or use of technologies other than mammography. Adding MRI to mammography increases screening sensitivity in women with BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 mutations and is the recommended screening approach for BRCA mutation carriers and women at substantially increased lifetime risk of breast cancer97,98,99. However, the International Agency for Research on Cancer reports that this has not been shown to improve mortality end points90. Use of adjunct imaging, such as ultrasonography, MRI and digital breast tomosynthesis (near-3D mammography), to screen women with high breast tissue density100,101 (heterogeneously or markedly dense breasts), in which there is a large amount of glandular tissue on the mammogram, increases breast cancer detection100 but has not been evaluated for mortality outcomes90. Emerging technologies such as tomosynthesis, contrast-enhanced mammography and gamma imaging show enhanced cancer detection rates in observational studies when added to mammography, but the body of evidence is robust only for tomosynthesis102, making this the most likely candidate for future breast cancer screening. At present, there is no convincing evidence that these new technologies enhance the screening benefit above that achieved with mammography alone90. Breast self-examination has not been shown to reduce breast cancer mortality, or to detect interval cancers between screening examinations90.Diagnostic work-up
Women experiencing breast symptoms or breast changes, such as a lump, localized pain, nipple symptoms or skin changes, require appropriate diagnostic evaluation, as do women who are recalled for further testing because of positive screening mammography. Diagnosing breast cancer is based on a triple test comprising clinical examination, imaging (usually mammography and/or ultrasonography) and needle biopsy103. Assessment entails performing the appropriate elements of the triple test, factoring in the patients’ characteristics and presentation, and should be performed before beginning treatment. Appropriate assessment helps to accurately discriminate between those who have breast cancer and those who have benign conditions (such as fibroadenoma) or normal breast changes and can be reassured or safely managed with follow-up, obviating the need for surgical intervention.

Ultrasonography is almost universally used to assess localized symptoms, as an initial imaging modality in young women, to identify and characterize screen-detected abnormalities and, preferentially, for imaging-guided percutaneous biopsy. Breast ultrasonography may also be used to characterize and biopsy axillary lymph nodes in women suspected of having breast cancer104. Imaging evaluation also includes MRI for specific clinical indications, such as in women for whom conventional imaging tests have been equivocal, inconclusive or discordant, for evaluating women with breast implants and for evaluating women with axillary nodal metastases but no detectable (occult) breast tumour99,105. Preoperative MRI is also selectively used for staging newly diagnosed disease, but this is a debated practice given the limited evidence on whether it enhances a patient’s clinical outcomes105. However, MRI is advised for preoperative assessment of newly diagnosed invasive lobular cancers99.

Pathological reporting
The use of a standardized synoptic pathology report with a checklist is highly recommended106. For an invasive carcinoma, the pathology report should provide details on the tumour histotype (according to the WHO classification), histological grade, hormone receptor and HER2 status, tumour size and lymph node involvement; at surgery, the surgical specimen is used to provide information on peritumoral vascular invasion and surgical margin status (Box 4). These data are indispensable for optimal patient management.Histotype WHO classification
According to the latest edition of the WHO classification, breast carcinomas are divided into 19 different major subtypes, including invasive carcinomas of no special type (70–75%; also known as not otherwise specified (formerly ductal carcinoma)), lobular carcinomas (10–14%) and the other carcinomas of special type (including 17 different rare histotypes and their subclassifiers)107 (Fig. 5). Breast cancer of ‘no special type’ is a carcinoma that does not fit into a specific histotype. Some of the special types (such as tubular, cribriform and mucinous) — if at least 90% pure (that is, no mixed histology or <10% of another subtype) — have a very good prognosis. On the other hand, some other special types (such as pleiomorphic lobular carcinoma, high-grade metaplastic carcinoma and micropapillary carcinoma) are associated with the poorest clinical outcome. Another special case is inflammatory breast cancer, a rare and aggressive form characterized by malignant cells blocking the lymph vessels in the skin of the breast (Box 5).The WHO classification recognizes different subtypes of invasive breast cancer, some of which are shown here, that harbour specific molecular alterations107. For example, lobular carcinomas and their precursors (lobular neoplasia) harbour CDH1 mutations leading to the pathognomonic loss of E-Cadherin expression by immunohistochemistry (85% of cases)324,325. They also harbour PIK3CA, PTEN, AKT1, ERBB2 and ERBB3 mutations and copy number gains in ESR1. Secretory carcinomas harbour a specific translocation t(12;15) leading to a fusion gene NTRK3–ETV6 (ref.326), whereas the adenoid cystic carcinoma is characterized by t(6;9) and the fusion gene MYB–NFIB327. Understanding these features may help in the design of tailored therapeutics for particular histological subtypes324. ER, oestrogen receptor; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2. Image of tall cell carcinoma with reverse polarity courtesy of G. MacGrogan, Institut Bergognié, France.

Histological grade
Assessment of histological grade is made according to the Elston- and Ellis-modified Scarff–Bloom–Richardson system108 and is based on three tumour features: the proportion of cancer cells that are in tubule formation, anisokaryosis (the variation of nuclear size and shape between the cells) and the number of mitoses (cell divisions). Each feature is scored with a three-tier system, and the final grade (G1, G2 or G3) is determined by adding the individual scores. Tumour grade reflects the potential aggressiveness of the breast cancer and is a strong prognostic factor.

Theranostic biomarkers
Determination of the ER, PR and HER2 status is mandatory for all patients with invasive breast cancer. These markers are recognized by international guidelines109,110,111 as predictive factors indispensable for invasive breast cancer therapy decision-making. At diagnosis, they are routinely tested by immunohistochemistry on the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples obtained from pre-surgical core biopsies.

Any nuclear staining (irrespective of the signal intensity) in >1% of invasive tumour cells is considered hormone receptor-positive (ER and/or PR) by the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) and the College of American Pathologists (CAP)112. Some countries, such as France, do not endorse these guidelines and consider 10% a more relevant cut-off value for hormone-sensitivity determination. According to ASCO and CAP, the HER2 status can be positive, negative or equivocal as assessed by one or two technical approaches113. Immunohistochemistry, fluorescent in situ hybridization or chromogenic in situ hybridization is currently recommended in routine practice; because of its availability and cost-effectiveness, immunohistochemistry is the preferred choice for HER2 status evaluation worldwide. HER2-positive status is characterized by a strong complete immunohistochemical membrane staining or by an amplification of ERBB2 detected by an in situ hybridization method (chromogenic in situ hybridization or fluorescent in situ hybridization) in ≥10% of invasive tumour cells. Repeat testing of the surgical specimen may be considered if results seem discordant with other histopathological findings.

Ki67 is widely used to determine proliferation and predicts chemosensitivity. However, Ki67 is relevant only for ER-positive, HER2-negative breast cancers. As HER2-positive breast cancers and TNBCs (with some exceptions) require chemotherapy, Ki67 does not bring any benefit to therapy decision-making in these subtypes. Furthermore, Ki67 determination is neither standardized nor generally recommended114. The most widely used cut-off value is 20% stained nuclei in invasive tumour cells; a fraction of <15% stained nuclei, whatever the intensity, is considered low proliferation, and >30% considered high proliferation.

Finally, given that TNBC does not express ER, PR or HER2, treatment decision-making is more difficult. However, genetic expression studies have identified subtypes of TNBC (Box 2), which may have prognostic and therapeutic implications although their clinical utility remains to be assessed.

Vascular invasion and surgical margins
Histology, grade, ER, PR and HER2 are routinely assessed on the pre-surgical biopsy specimens. Tumour type and grade are systematically reassessed on the surgical specimen, as are the predictive biomarkers if they are discrepant with the histopathological features.

Peri-tumoural vascular invasion is highly correlated with lymph node metastases and local recurrences115. A positive tumour margin when the tumour is excised (that is, cancer cells extending past the edge) — noted as a 0-mm margin, or ‘ink on tumour’ — confers a significant impact on local recurrence after conservation surgery116. The adequacy of a no ink on tumour margin in invasive breast cancer is endorsed by most guidelines and the margin for ductal carcinoma in situ is 2 mm with no abnormal cells around the specimen117,118,119,120,121. The report should specify the status of the margins: free or containing malignant cells, the distance to the closest margin and its nature (in situ or invasive). Non-free surgical margins necessitate further surgical intervention.

Lymph node status and pathological stage
The pathologist evaluates lymph node specimens either from a sentinel lymph node biopsy procedure or from a complete axillary dissection. A sentinel lymph node biopsy is accurate to assess axillary node status in clinical node-negative (that is, not palpable and not visible on imaging) disease, and avoids unnecessary axillary clearance with its associated morbidity (such as lymphoedema). In the biopsy procedure, the entire node must be extensively examined by serial sectioning to maximize its predictive value. The most widely used system for staging breast carcinoma is the TNM system published by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) and the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC). This system provides information about the extent of cancer at the primary site (tumour or T), at the regional lymph nodes (nodes or N) and spread to distant metastatic sites (metastases or M). Tumour size is assessed microscopically by measuring the largest diameter. In the case of multicentric tumours122, the largest tumour focus is the reference for T assessment (no addition is allowed). Special techniques for classification are not required and comparable information can, therefore, be collected over time and in different locations. T, N and M are combined to create five stages (stages 0–IV) that summarize information about the extent of regional disease (tumour size, skin or chest-wall invasion and nodal involvement) and metastasis to distant sites. Alongside clinical (c) and pathological (p) assessment, prefixes can also be used in the pathology report to indicate prior systemic therapy (y) or locoregional recurrence (r). Metastases are usually detected by imaging and then may be verified by biopsy. For individual patients, this information is important for making decisions concerning the control of local disease, as well as to determine the value of systemic therapy.

Prognosis
Classic prognostic factors include age, stage, tumour grade, tumour type and lymphovascular status. Breast cancer before 35 years of age is rare (<5% of patients), potentially more aggressive and more frequently associated with hereditary breast cancer. Geriatric patients with breast cancer (>75 years of age) experience 17% higher disease-specific mortality than younger patients123. With the extent of mammography screening, the stage at diagnosis has decreased and, concomitantly, the natural history of breast cancer has changed; prognostication, therefore, relies on tumour biology (histological type, grade, lymphovascular invasion and theranostic marker status). For ER-negative, HER2-negative breast cancers and for HER2-positive breast cancers, the presence of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes is associated with good prognosis124. As HER2-positive breast cancers and TNBCs are usually treated with chemotherapy with or without targeted therapy (see below, Management), tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes also represent predictive biomarkers for treatment response.

For the purpose of prognostication and treatment decision-making, several scoring systems have been developed, such as Adjuvant! Online, the Nottingham Prognostic Index125 and PREDICT126. These validated algorithms render good general estimates of patient prognosis and can aid in discussing therapy options with patients. However, they do not accurately reflect all specific patient subgroups or tumour biology subtypes127 and cannot be used as the sole criterion for treatment decisions in individual patients. The surrogate intrinsic subtypes are the most important criteria for treatment decisions (Fig. 1). Four subtypes of breast cancer are clinically valuable and imply distinct treatment approaches110,128. Luminal A-like tumours usually present with low-risk features such as low grade, high expression of ER and PR, low proliferation and a low-risk GES. By contrast, the luminal-B-like group expresses ER but not (or to a lesser extent) PR, and displays high grade or high proliferation and high-risk GESs. TNBC and non-luminal types show aggressive features such as high grade, no expression of ER, PR and HER2, and high proliferation. HER2-positive tumours more frequently display G2 or G3 features, low or absent expression of ER and PR, and medium to high proliferation. The claudin-low intrinsic transcriptomic group has no surrogate biomarker and is consequently not currently used in clinical practice.

Management
In early breast cancer without metastases, women with tumours that are deemed operable undergo surgery. However, most women also need some form of systemic therapy. Systemic therapy can be given before surgery (neoadjuvant) in women with large tumours for whom reducing the tumour burden is preferred or if information of pathological complete response (pCR), which is an absence of cancer cells in the surgical specimen after treatment, to pre-surgical treatment has prognostic value (such as in HER2-positive disease or TNBC129). Moreover, systemic therapy can be given after surgery (adjuvant) if the surgical result or biomarkers indicate increased risk of recurrence. For systemic therapies, many biomarkers have been validated for therapeutic decision-making (Table 2). All patients with ER-positive and/or PR-positive breast cancer, independent of HER2 status, should receive endocrine therapy to block the ER activity.The main question in luminal (hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative) early breast cancer is which patients need chemotherapy (neoadjuvant or adjuvant) in addition to endocrine therapy. In patients with luminal A disease and with low tumour burden, chemotherapy should be omitted. In general, the recommendation for chemotherapy in ER-positive, HER2-negative tumours may be influenced by proliferation (Ki67 expression) and — if available — the results of a GES.

As well as the traditional immunohistochemical markers, GES panels are used in many western countries, if available and/or reimbursed, for chemotherapy decisions in ER-positive, HER2-negative early breast cancer. Currently, several GES assays are available. First-generation signatures (OncotypeDx and MammaPrint) are performed in centralized (company-owned) laboratories. In tumours with 0–3 involved lymph nodes classified as low risk by a GES, adding chemotherapy to endocrine therapy can be avoided, whereas high-risk patients should receive chemotherapy. Currently, the prognostic value of MammaPrint130 and OncotypeDx131,132 is supported by level of evidence Ia and their use is recommended by several guidelines110,128,133,134. Consensus opinion is that patients with ER-positive, HER2-negative node-negative early breast cancer (considered having a high-clinical risk of relapse according to traditional criteria) who have a low genomic risk score can safely forgo neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy. However, the use MammaPrint and OncotypeDx in patients with 1–3 positive lymph nodes is still controversial as only few prospective trials have so far been reported130,135; the results of RxPONDER (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01272037) are awaited.

Second-generation GES assays (Prosigna and Endopredict) can be performed de-centrally on dedicated instruments. These assays have level of evidence Ib for prognosis in patients with ER-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer treated with endocrine therapy136; the lower evidence level is attributed to retrospective validation only. Indeed, the results generated from retrospective analysis of trials in which patients had only been treated with endocrine therapy need to be interpreted with caution when applied to patients at high clinical risk who would normally require chemotherapy. In addition to early relapse risk, these assays also predict late recurrences, information that may be used to indicate extended adjuvant endocrine therapy. Finally, GESs have no role in treatment decision-making in cases of very low clinico-pathological risk (such as patients with pT1a–b, pN0, G1 and high ER disease) or if clinico-pathological factors all point into the same direction (that is, towards low-risk or towards high-risk disease).

Early breast cancer
Locoregional therapy in early breast cancer regardless of molecular subtype comprises surgery to remove the tumour and to either stage the axillary tumour burden or excise the affected axillary lymph nodes. Postoperative radiation therapy and/or systemic therapies (which may comprise endocrine therapy, chemotherapy, targeted therapy and bone-modifying agents) are usually given depending on the initial tumour burden and molecular expression pattern of the tumour. Tumour down-sizing with systemic therapies prior to surgery is also encouraged for large tumours provided that the same systemic therapy would also be indicated after surgery. Figure 6 summarizes the therapeutic strategies for early breast cancer.
Management of early breast cancer is based on tumour burden and subtype. All patients with oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive disease receive adjuvant endocrine therapy after surgery. If patients are at high risk of recurrence (for example, owing to high-risk gene expression signature results with 0–3 involved lymph nodes, involvement of ≥4 lymph nodes or a >10% risk of breast cancer-specific mortality at 10 years)130, chemotherapy needs to be recommended as well. In triple-negative and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive early breast cancer, neoadjuvant subtype-specific systemic therapy is standard, followed by surgery. In the case that pathological complete response (pCR) is not achieved, systemic therapy can be escalated. Bisphosphonates are an additional adjuvant therapy option for all postmenopausal patients and premenopausal patients receiving ovarian suppression; they also conserve bone density. If indicated, radiation therapy can be administered after surgery. The management algorithm takes evidence-based registered therapy options into account. Availability and reimbursement of individual diagnostic or therapeutic options may differ regionally and require adjustments of the treatment concepts outlined here. −, negative; +, positive; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone; HR, hormone receptor; p, pathological; PR, progesterone receptor; N, node status; T, tumour grade; T-DM1, ado-trastuzumab emtansine. aOne study showed a benefit with 15 years of adjuvant endocrine therapy328.
Surgery
Surgery of the primary tumour remains a cornerstone of curative breast cancer treatment. Over the past decades, breast conservation has become the primary surgical goal137, substituting mastectomy, which was the historical standard (Fig. 7). Resection of the primary breast tumour is either the first step of treatment or second, after initial systemic therapy depending on tumour size, tumour to breast size relationship, tumour biology, comorbidities and patient choice138. After neoadjuvant systemic therapy, the surgical extent should be oriented at the ‘new’ tumour borders139. Recently, the discussion about the optimal margin width has come to a close with a global consensus140,141 that no ink on tumour is the appropriate surgical strategy121. Frozen sections, in which the margins of the resected specimen are assessed during the surgical procedure, can assist the surgeon to optimize the resection extent142, but are not available everywhere due to resource limitations143.Current surgical standards of care for breast-conserving surgery not only preserve the organ but also maintain the patient’s self-image, femininity and integrity compared with mastectomy (panel a; post mastectomy, 8 weeks after surgery). Selection factors for breast-conserving surgery include tumour to breast size relationship, number of tumours, tumour biology and the patient’s preference (after adequate information). Even complex surgical situations can be managed with satisfying aesthetic results (panel b; breast-conserving surgery for cancer of the left breast, 6 weeks after surgery) with modern oncoplastic techniques. In cases in which mastectomy is inevitable (for example, insufficient downstaging after neoadjuvant systemic therapy), the procedure should be (in terms of surgical technique) undertaken with the option of subsequent reconstructive procedures in mind; that is, unnecessary ‘invasiveness’ (affecting the muscle, blood vessels and skin) should be avoided whenever oncologically safe clear margins can be achieved. In situations in which nipple-sparing mastectomy (panel c; nipple-sparing mastectomy of the left breast with immediate transverse musculocutaneous gracilis flap reconstruction, 8 weeks after surgery with correction of the right side still pending) and or skin-sparing mastectomy are indicated (for example, extensive ductal carcinoma in situ or risk-reducing surgery in women with germline BRCA mutations), complete counselling about all available strategies (autologous or alloplastic, immediate or delayed, modified radical versus skin-sparing versus nipple-sparing mastectomy) should be provided to the patient. d | Another effort to reduce the potential harms of breast cancer surgery includes substituting axillary node dissection (removal) with sentinel node biopsy. In this technique, a dye is injected intraoperatively (and/or a radioactive tracer pre-operatively) to identify the sentinel node (arrows) so that it can be identified and removed.Indeed, breast-conserving surgery has been made possible by the widespread use of neoadjuvant systemic therapy to downsize tumours and the development of advanced oncoplastic techniques144, such as the ‘round-block’ procedure145 (a volume displacement technique for reconstruction) or the V-mammoplasty146 (in which a V-shaped wedge is cut around the tumour up to the point of the nipple and the breast is ‘closed’ together). However, an increasing rate of so-called prophylactic mastectomies (in which ‘healthy’ breasts are removed for prevention because of fear of the disease) is undermining this success; in general, prophylactic mastectomy does not improve overall survival147 in patients without BRCA germline mutations. Indeed, in young women <40 years of age, breast-conserving surgery plus whole-breast radiation therapy renders equivalent overall survival compared with mastectomy148. If mastectomy is oncologically required, breast reconstruction can be offered as an immediate or delayed procedure depending on the oncological situation and patient preference. Reconstructive techniques comprise implant surgery as well as autologous tissue breast reconstruction.

As axillary dissection results in considerable morbidity (despite effectively achieving locoregional control)149, efforts to de-escalate nodal assessment have been successfully implemented in several pivotal clinical trials150. Sentinel node biopsy, in which at least one sentinel lymph node is identified and removed (Fig. 7), is associated with no or almost no risk of arm lymphoedema, shoulder mobility restrictions, numbness or axillary web syndrome (whereby rope-like soft-tissue density can develop in the axilla after dissection)151 and is associated with excellent long-term locoregional relapse rates152. A multitude of clinical research questions about technology, detection strategies and tracers, procedural splitting in the context of neoadjuvant systemic therapy and others are currently being intensely discussed, but overall they all convey the benefit of surgical de-escalation to patients without gross nodal disease involvement153.

In the context of neoadjuvant therapy, sentinel node biopsy is performed after the systemic therapy to enable the patient to benefit from locoregional tumour downstaging. Whether ‘escalation’ of radiation therapy ‘compensates’ for less invasive axillary surgery is less clear and may at least partly erase the benefits of the surgical de-escalation154. Currently, the indications for sentinel node biopsy include situations after neoadjuvant systemic therapy155, but other surgical issues remain under discussion in this special context156. More recently, it has been suggested that not all patients with limited sentinel node metastasis require further axillary dissection145,157.

Radiation therapy
Postoperative radiation therapy improves disease-free and overall survival for patients with early breast cancer with lymph node involvement and/or in the framework of breast-conserving therapy, either by the elimination of residual tumour cells158,159 and/or by the induction of an abscopal effect160. The proportional reduction of locoregional recurrences with radiation therapy following surgery is, for most indications, ~75%, with a dose–effect relationship for local control161. However, the benefits in terms of any recurrences, including distant metastases, show a complex interaction with the risk factors of the primary tumour and the effectiveness of the adjuvant systemic therapy162. On the basis of risk factors for the development of distant metastases, primary or adjuvant systemic treatment, including endocrine therapy, chemotherapy and targeted treatments, can be prescribed. These treatments interact in a positive way with the benefits of locoregional treatments such as radiation therapy: for patients with high-risk disease, effective systemic treatments will decrease the risk of distant metastases, thereby increasing the importance of optimizing locoregional treatments to obtain definitive cancer cure.

Modern regional lymph node radiation therapy improves disease outcome without increasing non-breast-cancer-related mortality158,159,163,164,165. Generally, patients with large tumours (>5 cm)166 with extensive lymph node involvement (>3 axillary nodes), or in the presence of other unfavourable risk factors, receive lymph node radiation therapy; however, no consensus has been reached on the use of lymph node radiation therapy in lower-risk patients, including those with 1–3 involved axillary lymph nodes162,167,168. The Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group (EBCTCG) meta-analysis of clinical trials evaluating regional lymph node radiation therapy, as presented at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in December 2018, showed a statistically significant benefit for breast cancer-related and overall mortality that was greatest in patients with ≥4 involved axillary lymph nodes169. Thus, as we await the outcome of the MRC/EORTC (BIG 2–04) SUPREMO phase III trial170 (which is assessing the value of chest wall irradiation in intermediate-risk patients with breast cancer) and further optimize the technical aspects of radiation therapy171,172,173, we must explain the option of postmastectomy irradiation to patients with less advanced disease as well. Additionally, several studies have shown that completion of axillary surgery after a sentinel node biopsy confirmed nodal involvement does not improve outcome in women with early breast cancer compared with axillary nodal irradiation; instead, regional nodal radiation therapy can improve outcomes in selected patients and is increasingly being used instead of axillary surgery163,164,165,174.

For patients with low-risk features — based on tumour size, grade, nodal involvement, age and molecular profile — radiation therapy after local excision offers, for the same relative risk reduction, lower absolute benefits. This is especially the case if local treatments are followed by adjuvant endocrine treatment, further reducing the absolute benefits in terms of local control and overall survival174. However, trials that included a treatment arm that omitted both radiation and endocrine therapy demonstrated that long-term recurrence rates without any postoperative treatment were too high and that both radiation and endocrine therapy reduced local recurrence rates to a similar extent, with an additive effect if both treatments were combined175. Although these trials only reported outcomes in terms of disease recurrence and survival, without an evaluation of the quality of life, and the benefit derived from adjuvant endocrine therapy for these patients is very low, the findings reignited the debate concerning (the omission of) treatment in low-risk patients.

Patients who receive primary systemic therapy (typically those with locoregionally advanced disease but increasingly those with early-stage breast cancer) pose a clinical challenge for the indications and prescription of radiation therapy. On the basis of results from retrospective evaluation of prospective clinical trials176,177,178, current international clinical guidelines166,179 recommend that radiation therapy should be given based on the risk factors present at initial diagnosis, taking into account the response to primary systemic therapy. Until the results from prospective trials examining the role of radiation therapy in these patients, including ALLIANCE A011202 (NCT01901094) and NSABP B-51/RTOG1304 (NCT01872975), become available, it is recommended that a radiation oncologist is involved in treatment planning before initiation of primary systemic therapy. This approach will not only optimize target volume selection and dose prescription, but will also facilitate the making of CT scans dedicated for radiation therapy for later image co-registration, which is of utmost importance to deliver precision radiation therapy following remission on imaging and subsequent surgery.

Decreasing the burden of radiation therapy can be achieved by several means, starting with the strict adaptation of volume-based radiation therapy techniques using anatomically defined contouring guidelines to improve the dose coverage of the risk-bearing tissues while simultaneously decreasing the size of the irradiated volumes174,180. This approach facilitates a broad adaptation of hypofractionated radiation therapy that shortens the duration of a radiation therapy series from typically 5 weeks to ~3 weeks using fewer but slightly higher-dosed fractions combined with a reduced numerical but radiobiologically-equivalent dose181,182,183. Another approach to shorten the duration of the radiation therapy series, to lower the risks of developing fibrosis and to reduce unfavourable cosmetic outcomes is applying more restrictive indications for boost dose delivery to the primary tumour bed after breast-conserving therapy174,184. Finally, (accelerated) partial breast irradiation is now an accepted treatment for selected patients with low-risk features for local recurrence that not only reduces the irradiated volume but can also shorten the radiation therapy series to 1–2 weeks or even a single intraoperative dose delivery during the surgical procedure185,186. However, a careful evaluation and interpretation187,188 of the literature is necessary to select the most appropriate radiation therapy strategy from the wide range of treatment techniques available, including intraoperative techniques using electrons189 or low-energy photons190 (which has an insufficient reported follow-up duration of 27 months). With all these optimizations of all aspects of radiation therapy in breast cancer, the adverse effects can be reduced without compromising outcome (Fig. 8).The schematic illustrates the volumetric intensity-modulated dose distribution at the level of the original tumour location, including a simultaneous integrated boost dose for a patient with early-stage disease who had a medially located primary tumour bed in the right breast. The blue colour wash represents a 50-Gy-equivalent dose, prescribed to the entire breast; the red colour wash represents the 10–16-Gy-equivalent dose to the high-risk zone at the primary tumour bed. The white dot in the middle of the colour wash represents the surgical clip left behind to guide the identification of the original tumour location. This treatment typically causes mild and temporary skin reactions and possibly leads to late development of fibrosis at the primary tumour site that received the boost dose.Systemic therapy
Systemic therapies for early breast cancer are highly effective, and adjuvant endocrine therapy and adjuvant chemotherapy are able to decrease breast cancer mortality by approximately one-third independent of each other191,192. However, the individual indication depends on the molecular subtype, tumour burden and absolute risk of recurrence. Chemotherapy can be given before (neoadjuvant) or after (adjuvant) surgery with equivalent effects on outcomes, as first demonstrated by the NSABP-B18 trial193. Neoadjuvant application is preferred if reduction of tumour size is warranted for optimal surgical results or to assess the response of the tumour in vivo. In certain subtypes (HER2-positive breast cancers and TNBCs), neoadjuvant administration has become the standard of care as the pCR is correlated with patient outcome and adjuvant therapy choice may differ based on the pCR status.

In luminal early breast cancer (that is, all ER-positive and/or PR-positive tumours), adjuvant endocrine therapy is standard for at least 5 years after surgery. In premenopausal patients, tamoxifen (which binds to and inhibits ER) is standard; in high-risk premenopausal patients who also received adjuvant chemotherapy, adding ovarian suppression with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogue (which inhibits oestradial production) to tamoxifen improves DFS and overall survival compared with tamoxifen alone, as demonstrated by the joint analysis of the SOFT and TEXT trials194. A GnRH analogue plus an aromatase inhibitor also improves recurrence-free survival compared with tamoxifen alone or compared with tamoxifen plus a GnRH analogue, but at the expense of higher toxicity; however, regarding overall survival, tamoxifen plus a GnRH analogue seems more beneficial194,195. In postmenopausal women with luminal early breast cancer, tamoxifen and an aromatase inhibitor are standard either as monotherapies (upfront) or in sequence. An aromatase inhibitor should be included in adjuvant endocrine therapy to reduce recurrence rates compared with tamoxifen (albeit with only minor impact on overall survival). Compared with tamoxifen, 5 years of an aromatase inhibitor reduces breast cancer mortality by ~15% (relative benefit)196. The definite choice of agent depends on the relapse risk, tolerability, bone health and patient preference.

After 5 years of endocrine therapy, recurrences still occur in patients with luminal early breast cancer over at least 20 years, at a rate strongly dependent on the initial tumour burden197. Extended adjuvant endocrine therapy for up to 10 years, or even 15 years, imparts favourable patient outcomes198. Nevertheless, the decision for such an approach needs to take relapse risk and tolerability into account; extended adjuvant endocrine therapy is particularly beneficial for patients at high risk for relapse (that is, those with node-positive disease). Several randomized phase III trials have shown CDK4/6 inhibitors (which block cell cycling) to be active and they have become the preferred treatment option in combination with endocrine therapy in hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer199,200,201. Currently, four large international adjuvant trials are evaluating addition of a CDK4/6 inhibitor to endocrine therapy for 2–3 years in patients with intermediate to high-risk luminal HER2-negative early breast cancer. PALLAS (NCT02513394) and monarchE (NCT03155997) have already completed recruitment; NATALEE (NCT03701334) and ADAPTcycle (EudraCT 2018-003749-40) are still recruiting.

In luminal HER2-negative early breast cancer, the recommendation for chemotherapy in addition to endocrine therapy depends on the individual risk of recurrence. In general, if the risk of recurrence is estimated to be >10% over 10 years, chemotherapy is recommended. Standard chemotherapy regimens include an anthracycline and a taxane given preferentially in sequence with care to avoid excessive toxicity202. 5-Fluorouracil does not increase efficacy of an anthracycline and cyclophosphamide backbone in early breast cancer203. In patients with intermediate clinical risk, docetaxel plus cyclophosphamide is not inferior to a standard sequential anthracycline–taxane regimen135. However, in patients with high clinical risk (that is, >3 involved lymph nodes), an anthracycline–taxane regimen seems to be superior204. Dose-dense administration of chemotherapy (in which the rate of delivery, rather than the overall dose, is increased) significantly improves 10-year breast cancer-related mortality independent of ER status and tumour burden without any detectable adverse effects on non-breast-cancer-related mortality205. Adding drugs, such as capecitabine, gemcitabine or bevacizumab, to an anthracycline–taxane chemotherapy does not improve outcomes in early breast cancer.

In HER2-positive early breast cancer (that is, luminal-like and non-luminal-like HER2-positive early breast cancer), neoadjuvant chemotherapy together with anti-HER2 therapy has become the standard of care (at least in tumours ≥cT2, cN0 and all cN+). This approach is preferred as achievement of pCR is correlated with improved outcome (DFS and overall survival)129 and adjuvant therapy selection may be influenced by pCR status. In the neoadjuvant setting, dual HER2-blockade with trastuzumab and pertuzumab together with chemotherapy improves rates of pCR and is, therefore, considered standard206. Based on data from the adjuvant setting, chemotherapy in HER2-positive early breast cancer may consist of either an anthracycline–taxane sequence or a combination of docetaxel and carboplatin together with anti-HER2 therapy (for 1 year). The KATHERINE trial demonstrated for the first time that pCR status can be used to escalate postoperative anti-HER2 therapy: switching from trastuzumab (an anti-HER2 antibody) to T-DM1 (a trastuzumab–emtansine conjugate that combines HER2-blockade with a cytotoxic agent) in the case of non-pCR significantly and substantially improved outcomes (HR 0.5 for invasive DFS; 95% CI 0.39–0.64, P < 0.001)207 and will now be the new standard for patients with non-pCR. In the adjuvant setting, dual HER2-blockade with trastuzumab and pertuzumab also improves DFS compared with trastuzumab alone. After short-term follow-up, absolute 3-year survival differences are small and patients with node-positive or hormone receptor-negative tumours seem to benefit most208. In patients who had already received 1 year of trastuzumab, an additional 1 year of neratinib (versus placebo) improved invasive DFS with the effect being most pronounced in in hormone receptor-positive, HER2-positive disease (HR 0.73; 95% CI 0.57–0.92, P = 0.0083)209. However, the additional value of neratinib in the context of adjuvant dual blockade or post-neoadjuvant T-DM1 is not clear. In patients with a low tumour burden, de-escalation seems possible; adjuvant administration of paclitaxel and 1 year of trastuzumab is correlated with excellent outcomes in patients with pN0 HER2-positive tumours ≤3 cm in size210,211. So far, 1-year total duration of anti-HER2 therapy remains the standard for all patients as the data on shorter duration are still controversial; the PERSEPHONE trial212 demonstrated non-inferiority of 6 months of trastuzumab compared with 12 months for patients receiving anthracycline–taxane, whereas others studies, such as PHARE213 and SOLD214, have failed to prove this non-inferiority. Longer than 1 year of duration is no more effective, as demonstrated by the HERA trial215,216.

In TNBC, chemotherapy is standard and typically contains an anthracycline and a taxane, although docetaxel and cyclophosphamide are as effective135 — at least in TNBC with limited disease burden — and may be used if anthracyclines need to be avoided. As with HER2-positive early breast cancer, chemotherapy is preferentially administered in the neoadjuvant setting. Achievement of a pCR is correlated with improved outcome (DFS and overall survival)129; a platinum compound increases pCR rates independent of BRCA status217. Adding a platinum compound also increases toxicity (mostly haematological), which may impair adequate taxane dose intensity. Whether adding platinum also improves outcome in addition to pCR is still under debate as a DFS advantage was shown in the GeparSixto trial but not in the CALGB 40603 trial217,218. In the case of non-pCR, treatment escalation with additional adjuvant chemotherapy is feasible in HER2-negative early breast cancer, as demonstrated by the CREATEx trial; additional adjuvant capecitabine improved DFS and overall survival, with the survival benefit being most pronounced in TNBC219.

Finally, bone-modifying agents such as bisphosphonates or the RANK-L antibody denosumab not only improve bone mineral density and decrease treatment-related bone loss but may also improve patient outcomes. However, the data on denosumab in early breast cancer are controversial. Although it is effective in lowering fracture rates in postmenopausal patients receiving adjuvant aromatase inhibitors220, its use may also improve DFS in selected postmenopausal patients221 but not in a more general breast cancer population as demonstrated by the negative phase III D-CARE trial222. By contrast, an EBCTCG meta-analysis (n > 18,000) showed that adjuvant bisphosphonates improve DFS, distant DFS and breast cancer mortality (HR 0.82; 95% CI 0.73–0.93, P = 0.002) in postmenopausal patients independent of tumour biology or type of bisphosphonate therapy223. In premenopausal women receiving ovarian suppression, zoledronic acid also improved DFS in the ABCSG-12 trial195, but there is no clear advantage for premenopausal women in other trials such as AZURE224 as well as in the EBCTCG meta-analysis223.

Advanced breast cancer
Advanced breast cancer comprises inoperable locally advanced breast cancer, which has not spread to distant organs, and metastatic (stage IV) breast cancer; common sites of spread are bone, the lungs and the liver (Fig. 9)225. Currently, it is a treatable but virtually incurable disease, with metastases being the cause of death in almost all patients, and a median overall survival of 2–3 years225. Patients with metastatic breast cancer receive treatments that aim to relieve their symptoms and to prolong quality-adjusted life expectancy. Generally, local treatments are not the mainstay of advanced breast cancer treatment but are very useful in some situations, such as brain and bone metastases. Multidisciplinary evaluation of the complex interaction between the contributions of systemic and locoregional treatments to the final outcome (such as survival and toxicity) will ultimately reduce the risk of dying due to distant metastasis162. De novo metastatic disease (which presents as metastatic at initial diagnosis) and recurrent metastatic disease (which presents after initial diagnosis and treatment of early breast cancer) are somewhat different biologically and some differences exist in management. Recurrent disease is more aggressive and more resistant to therapy, whereas de novo metastatic disease poses the problem of how to treat the primary tumour.The most frequent nodal site is the axillary lymph nodes and the frequency of involvement depends on the size of the tumour. 10–40% of breast cancers have metastasis in the internal mammary chain, influenced by the topography of the tumour in the breast (inner quadrant versus outer quadrant and the size). Controversy abounds with regard to the value of staging and treatment of these nodes, for example, whether or not they need to be dealt with surgically or by radiation therapy. Breast cancer hones to distant metastatic sites differentially according to the molecular subtype according to data from the US Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program (SEER) database (data from 2010 to 2014, 295,213 patients with invasive breast cancer). Locoregional lymphatic spread is less frequent in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) than in other subtypes. The opposite is true for brain metastases, which are more frequent in TNBC than luminal tumours. Additionally, metastatic disease occurs at different time points in the natural history; for example, luminal A cancers typically show late metastatic occurrence (5–10 years after diagnosis) and long survival is possible. By contrast, basal-like subtypes usually metastasize within 2 years, and long survival durations are uncommon. The percentage of metastases found at that site are shown in parentheses. +, positive; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2. Based on data from ref.81.Surgery
In patients with metastatic breast cancer, resection of metastases remains controversial, but may be an option for selected patients based on the pattern and metachronicity of the disease226. Although resection of the primary tumour in de novo stage IV breast cancer has long been controversial based on retrospective series that had suggested some benefit227,228, three contemporary prospective trials did not demonstrate any benefit229,230,231. Still, these findings may not be true for every individual patient in the era of increasingly effective systemic therapies232,233 and, in general, surgery of the primary tumour is not recommended although it may be discussed on a case-by-case basis for patients with excellent responses to systemic therapy and a low burden of distant disease225,234. Palliative surgery is also of important value in individual situations of locally advanced breast cancer to achieve adequate locoregional control, as well as a frequent treatment tool in resource-limited environments235.

Radiation therapy
Radiation therapy, which has a crucial role in alleviating symptoms from bone, brain and soft tissue metastases, among others, should be prescribed in a multidisciplinary and individualized approach with dose and fractionation schedules depending on the severity of the lesions and the remaining life expectancy236,237. For most patients with bone metastases, a single dose of 8 Gy is sufficient, as demonstrated in a large prospective randomized trial238. This approach provides sufficient tumour volume reduction for restoration of the invaded or compressed surrounding normal structures.

The paradigm of not treating the primary tumour is increasingly being challenged, particularly in cases of only a limited number of metastases (currently set at 5). Radiation therapy might also induce a systemic immune response, which may act on neighbouring (bystander effect) or distantly located (abscopal effect) non-irradiated tumour cells239. A population-based US Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program (SEER) study (median follow-up 98 months, n = 3,529) showed that the 768 patients who received radiation therapy to the primary tumour demonstrated improved overall survival (HR 0.80, P < 0.001); even after adjusting for prognostic factors, the benefit of radiation therapy remained significant (HR 0.86, P = 0.011)240,241.

This potentially important use of radiation therapy in metastatic disease has spurred new research in the field of immunotherapy242. Most breast cancer types are non-inflamed, immune ‘cold’ tumours that are likely unresponsive to immunotherapy. Thus, the microenvironment needs to be primed to stimulate the immune response, which can be achieved with radiation therapy, among others. This could be of future interest for all patients with high-risk disease.

Systemic therapies
Given the rapidly evolving nature of systemic therapies and regimens in this setting, here we focus on approved therapies. As in the early setting, systemic therapy is guided by biology (Fig. 10); the relative distribution of subtypes in the metastatic setting is similar to that in the early setting243. Biopsy and assessment of receptor status (ER and HER2 in particular; PR is less relevant in the metastatic setting) at least once during the course of advanced breast cancer, preferentially at first metastasis, can verify histology and assess potential changes in tumour biology from the primary tumour225. Multigene panels have not yet been proven useful in the metastatic setting in clinical trials and are only research tools225. Circulating tumour markers (of which cancer antigen 15–3 (CA 15–3) is the most important protein marker produced by breast cancer cells) alone should not initiate a change in therapy, and progression must be confirmed by imaging225.Management of advanced breast cancer with distant metastases should be according to subtype as well as disease characteristics and patient preferences. Supportive, palliative and psychosocial support are crucial from the time of diagnosis. Biopsy of a metastatic site and assessment of oestrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status, at least once in the metastatic setting, are also necessary. Endocrine therapy, with or without targeted therapy, is the mainstay for luminal-like disease, and — unless life-threatening — several lines are to be used before commencing chemotherapy. When chemotherapy is used, sequential monotherapy is advised. For triple-negative disease, chemotherapy is the main treatment, with no specific recommendations except that platinum is one of the preferred options. Triple-negative tumours with immune cells expressing programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) may be candidates for first-line immunotherapy. For HER2-positive disease, it is crucial to continue blocking the HER2 pathway, with a sequence of anti-HER2 agents and chemotherapy; combinations of endocrine therapy with anti-HER2 therapy can also be used in ER-positive, HER2-positive disease, preferentially as maintenance therapy. For women harbouring germline BRCA mutations, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors are an additional therapy option. The management algorithm takes evidence-based registered therapy options into account. Availability and reimbursement of individual diagnostic or therapeutic options may differ regionally and require adjustments of the treatment concepts outlined here. −, negative; +, positive; PFS, progression-free survival; T-DM1, ado-trastuzumab emtansine; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.For all luminal-like metastatic breast cancers, several lines of endocrine-based therapy should be used until no response is obtained (endocrine resistance), unless there is rapid progression or visceral crisis (severe organ dysfunction) emerges225,244. For premenopausal patients, ovarian suppression or ablation is required, in addition to another endocrine therapy agent (tamoxifen, an aromatase inhibitor or fulvestrant (a selective ER degrader))225,244. For postmenopausal patients, first-line endocrine therapy can be an aromatase inhibitor, fulvestrant or tamoxifen, depending on the adjuvant endocrine therapy received and the duration of DFS225,244.

When aiming at delaying or overcoming endocrine resistance, CDK4/6 inhibitors (palbociclib, ribociclib and abemaciclib) and mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors (everolimus) have been studied and approved. Everolimus improves PFS by ±5 months but not overall survival. CDK4/6 inhibitors substantially improve PFS (±10 months in the first line and ±5 months in the second line). Results from the PALOMA 3 phase III trial suggest that the PFS benefit may be maintained as an overall survival benefit, but this finding was not statistically significant245. The MONALEESA-7 study in premenopausal patients showed a significant prolongation of overall survival for first-line use of a CDK4/6 (ribociclib) in combination with ovarian suppression and an aromatase inhibitor or tamoxifen compared with endocrine therapy alone (HR 0.71; 95% CI, 0.54–0.95, P = 0.00973). At 42 months, 70% of patients were still alive in the ribociclib group compared with only 46% in the control group. In view of additional cardiac toxicity with tamoxifen, ribociclib is only approved with an aromatase inhibitor (plus GnRH) in this setting.

Even though the MONALEESA-7 data now suggest a survival advantage in the first-line setting for CDK4/6 inhibitor therapy, the optimal sequence of therapies in metastatic disease is still unknown. When chemotherapy is needed (for example, once endocrine therapy options have been exhausted or if no response is obtained with them), sequential use of monochemotherapy is recommended; combination chemotherapy should be reserved for situations of visceral crisis or rapidly progressive disease225. The preferred first-line agents for patients previously treated with adjuvant anthracyclines and taxanes are capecitabine, vinorelbine or eribulin. Anthracycline and/or taxane rechallenge therapy may also be an option in patients with a treatment-free interval of ≥1 year. In combination with taxane or capecitabine chemotherapy, bevacizumab (an antibody against vascular endothelial growth factor) is a first-line option that improves PFS but not overall survival; it is registered in Europe but not the United States246. For later lines of therapy, many available options are available and the decision should be individualized considering different toxicity profiles, previous exposure, patient preferences, country availability and costs225. The duration of each regimen and the number of cycles should also be individualized, and chemotherapy should be continued until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. Again, the optimal sequence is unknown.

For HER2-positive advanced breast cancer (including ER-positive and ER-negative, HER2-positive disease), anti-HER2 agents should be started early and continued beyond progression225,247. In patients previously untreated with trastuzumab, the preferred first-line option is dual HER2-blockade with trastuzumab and pertuzumab plus chemotherapy (usually docetaxel, paclitaxel, nab-paclitaxel, vinorelbine or capecitabine)225,247. In patients previously exposed to adjuvant trastuzumab (or those in countries without access to pertuzumab), this regimen or trastuzumab plus chemotherapy (usually vinorelbine or a taxane) can be used225. Second-line options include T-DM1, trastuzumab plus another chemotherapy agent (usually capecitabine, vinorelbine or taxane (if not used previously), but also eribulin, liposomal anthracyclines, platinum, gemcitabine or metronomic cyclophosphamide with methotrexate), or trastuzumab plus lapatinib (a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that interrupts the HER2 and epidermal growth factor receptor pathways)225,247. Combinations of trastuzumab plus chemotherapy are superior to lapatinib plus chemotherapy. Sequential monochemotherapy should be used225, although the optimal sequence of all available options is unknown. For HER2-positive, ER-positive disease, combinations of endocrine therapy and anti-HER2 agents are possible both as initial treatment and as maintenance treatment225,247.

For TNBC, there are no different or specific chemotherapy recommendations for patients without BRCA mutations225,248. For BRCA-associated advanced TNBC, a platinum agent is the preferred option. In these patients and in those with BRCA-mutated luminal advanced breast cancer, recent data have shown improved PFS and improved quality of life with a PARP inhibitor (olaparib or talazoparib) compared with monochemotherapy30,31. In TNBC with >1% programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1) immune cell staining, nab-paclitaxel plus atezolizumab has shown significantly superior PFS compared with nab-paclitaxel alone in the first-line setting; although a numerical overall survival advantage (7–10 months) seems evident in the PD-L1 immune cell-staining subgroup, final data on overall survival are still awaited249.

Monitoring treatment response
In early breast cancer, imaging during neoadjuvant chemotherapy may be used to guide tailored treatment to improve rates of pCR and breast conservation in both early responders and non-responders. Clinical examination and ultrasonography have been used in clinical trials to monitor tumour size before and during neoadjuvant chemotherapy to inform a change in therapy during the regimen. Metabolic and functional imaging (PET, dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI or diffusion-weighted MRI) potentially enable earlier assessment of response, but response criteria for these tests are not yet standardized250,251. After neoadjuvant chemotherapy, imaging can identify pCR and assist in surgical planning. MRI accurately detects pCR after neoadjuvant chemotherapy252 and improves measurement of tumour size compared with ultrasonography, mammography and clinical examination253. Studies also show that PET performed after 1–2 cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy can also predict treatment response in patients with large operable and locally advanced breast cancer254.

In the metastatic setting, imaging of the chest (CT or X-ray), abdomen (CT or ultrasonography) and bone (usually radionuclide bone scan) is recommended225 for pretreatment staging, although PET or PET–CT may be used selectively for staging or restaging255. Additional organ-specific imaging in patients with metastatic breast cancer is reserved for symptom evaluation, and for response monitoring when it complements clinical evaluation and appropriate laboratory testing256. However, there is a paucity of good-quality evidence on the comparative effectiveness of imaging tests, and a lack of data on optimal timing and frequency of monitoring and the effect that imaging monitoring has on patient outcomes257. With these limitations in mind, either conventional imaging (CT, bone scan or MRI depending on the site of metastases) or PET–CT may be used for response monitoring; PET–CT has been reported to have equivalent or better accuracy in detecting treatment response compared with each of the conventional imaging modalities257. PET–CT provides functional information on tumour metabolism and, therefore, can potentially identify response at earlier time points during treatment than the relatively delayed gross morphological changes defined by conventional imaging257. However, in many countries, the use of PET–CT is more expensive than other imaging modalities.

Quality of life
Treatment individualization is crucial and should consider patient-related and tumour-related factors. The assessment of patient-reported outcomes related to toxicities and quality of life is increasingly recognized as an important component of oncology research to inform individualized clinical decision-making. Frank discussion of the goals of treatment, using accessible language, is fundamental — as is appropriate psychosocial, supportive and palliative care, from the initial diagnosis and through all stages of treatment. All patients should be discussed and managed by a multidisciplinary team.

Many breast cancer treatments cause substantial toxicities that can impair quality of life. Although most existing data on symptom management and quality of life come from postmenopausal patients with early-stage breast cancer, studying and managing adverse effects is particularly important in patients with metastatic disease, who generally continue to take a given systemic therapy until progression or excessive toxicity requires a change. Impact on quality of life is a critical consideration when weighing the risks and benefits of any breast cancer therapy, but especially for palliative therapies. Indeed, the adverse effects of systemic therapies are numerous for most patients. Endocrine therapy frequently causes hot flashes, with tamoxifen and ovarian suppression-based regimens known to be particularly powerful hot-flash inducers258,259. Management strategies for hot flashes include medications (such as serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor venlafaxine and GABA analogue gabapentin) and mind–body techniques (such as hypnosis and acupuncture)260,261,262. Aromatase inhibitors often produce arthralgias (joint pain), which are commonly treated with NSAIDs and exercise, but these strategies are not supported by strong evidence263. Aromatase inhibitors also cause vaginal dryness and dyspareunia, for which vaginal moisturizers and lubricants have been the traditional mainstays of management in patients with hormone-sensitive tumours, but novel treatments such as vaginal dehydroepiandrosterone are under study264.

Chemotherapy causes both acute toxicities (such as nausea and fatigue) and chronic toxicities (such as infertility, cardiotoxicity, neuropathy and cognitive dysfunction). Cancer-related fatigue and cognitive dysfunction are difficult to treat, but nausea is now well-managed in most patients using multi-agent anti-emetic regimens265. With regard to cardiotoxicity, the PRADA study showed that carvedilol (a non-selective adrenergic receptor used to treat heart failure and hypertension) may protect against asymptomatic anthracycline-induced reductions in ejection fraction, which could translate into later improvements in quality of life related to cardiac function266. In addition, the serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor duloxetine has been definitively proven to treat (albeit with modest benefit) chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy267,268, and ongoing research is assessing methods for prevention of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (including tactile stimulation, cryotherapy and acupuncture)269,270,271. With the development of new targeted therapies for breast cancer (see below, Outlook), it will be important to study their effects on quality of life, and to develop management strategies for their associated symptoms (for example, steroid mouthwashes for stomatitis from everolimus).

Local therapies can also impair quality of life. Reduced use of full axillary dissection has limited the incidence and severity of lymphoedema in breast cancer survivors, but some patients are still affected. Risk of lymphoedema is increased by obesity, more extensive axillary surgery, use of radiation therapy and, possibly, chemotherapy272,273. Dermatitis and pneumonitis are other quality-of-life-limiting radiation toxicities, and both surgery and radiation therapy can produce acute fatigue, chronic pain and cosmetic concerns274,275.

In addition to impacting the symptom burden, breast cancer treatments can burden patients financially and psychosocially. Lost employment and cost of care can be economically challenging, and dealing with a potentially fatal diagnosis (including relying on friends and family to help with, for example, transportation and home responsibilities) can be emotionally challenging. Clinical trials must take into account the effect of new drugs and treatment strategies on quality of life by collecting patient-reported outcomes using validated instruments (Table 3). In addition, more research is needed to identify effective supportive interventions both during and after active treatment.The impressive increase in knowledge in the field of molecular biology and immunology has helped to elucidate the molecular characteristics of cancer and is the basis for a plethora of upcoming drugs. However, although important improvements have been achieved in recent years in terms of metastatic breast cancer outcomes, more and better treatments are needed. Research that provides biological insights into overdiagnosis as a result of breast cancer screening or that mitigates its consequences through modified therapeutic approaches would also be valuable91. Nevertheless, one of the global challenges we face is the limited access to diagnosis and affordable and effective treatment that leads to disparities in cancer survival between countries. As one of the most common cancers, breast cancer is a bustling research field. Here, we summarize some of the emerging findings that are likely to have the most impact on patients. However, we emphasize that the most pressing global challenge in the breast cancer field is to ensure that all patients have access to high-quality standard diagnosis (imaging and pathology) and treatment (surgery, radiation and systemic therapy), avoid late diagnosis and are provided with adequate supportive and palliative care services.

Early breast cancer
In early breast cancer, cancer-specific mortality has been substantially reduced by modern multimodal therapy concepts. Treatment de-escalation and escalation are currently being evaluated — in both locoregional and systemic therapies. However, evidence-based adaptation of current standards is required to ensure that patients are not undertreated while attempting to avoid overtreatment. De-escalation of radiation therapy trials are attempting to define populations with luminal A early breast cancer at low risk, for whom radiation therapy after breast-conserving surgery may not be needed. Surgical de-escalation trials are examining the role of sentinel node biopsy in cN0 disease, provided that standard postoperative therapy is being administered. The neoadjuvant setting in early breast cancer offers an ideal model for in vivo response testing and stratifying the postoperative approach according to pCR. For example, patients with pCR may be able to de-escalate postoperative adjuvant therapy whereas patients with non-pCR are candidates for further therapy escalation. With regards to locoregional therapy, the role of surgery in cases of clinical complete response (that is, whether it can be completely omitted) and the role of postoperative radiation therapy in patients who converted from node-positive to node-negative disease with neoadjuvant systemic therapy (for example, the aforementioned NSABP-B51/RTOG1304 trial) are being investigated. In luminal early breast cancer, short-term endocrine therapy before surgery and assessment of the proliferation response (for example, Ki67 ≤10%) in the surgical specimen — as a surrogate for endocrine therapy responsiveness — may help to adapt adjuvant therapy concepts276,277,278.

In the adjuvant setting, decreasing unnecessary toxicities from overtreatment without compromising outcome will also be a challenge for the years to come. However, the downside of the success in adjuvant therapies is the substantial alteration in metastatic disease, with less-favourable metastasis patterns and shorter post-metastasis survival279, which increases the challenge for management of advanced breast cancer. Epidemiological data suggest that contemporary adjuvant systemic therapies exert evolutionary pressures on the tumours279 given changes in metastatic patterns and decreased survival times that have not been observed in de novo metastatic breast cancer280. These epidemiological findings parallel those of whole-genome sequencing studies, which show that metastatic breast cancers have similar genetic patterns to primary breast cancer with subtype-specific enrichment of selected driver mutations in the metastatic lesions281. In invasive lobular cancers, matched-pair analysis of primary tumours and their corresponding metastases also revealed acquisition of several genomic alterations (such as mutations in CDH1, ESR1, ARID1A, ERBB2, GATA3, IGF1R, MAP3K1 and PIK3CA) at a frequency of 5–11% in metastatic disease that could be associated with disease progression and development of endocrine resistance282. Some of these alterations, such as ESR1 or PIK3CA, are already becoming relevant for choosing specific targeted therapies.

Advanced breast cancer
Upcoming drugs and pathways
Recent preclinical studies have revealed various targetable pathways that may optimize available therapies or overcome resistance to available drugs (Fig. 11). For example, the PI3K–AKT–mTOR signalling pathway is the subject of intense research in breast cancer. Pan-PI3K inhibitors proved to be too toxic and their development was replaced by PI3K isoform-specific inhibitors such as alpelisib and taselisib283. Alpelisib, an α-specific PI3K inhibitor, has been approved by the FDA on the basis of the longest PFS improvement of this class of agents so far (~5 months of benefit in PFS, HR 0.65; 95% CI 0.50–0.85) in hormone-resistant ER-positive, HER2-negative PIK3CA-mutated advanced breast cancer when combined with fulvestrant, with moderate toxicity284. Taselisib, a β-sparing PI3K inhibitor, moderately improves PFS in in the same population when combined with fulvestrant in patients with wild-type and with PI3K-mutant tumours but with clinically relevant toxicities285. Recently, two randomized phase II studies have shown that AKT inhibitors can be active in patients with TNBC. When the AKT pathway was active, both ipatasertib286 and capivasertib287 improved the activity of paclitaxel. In the phase II FAKTION trial (NCT01992952)288, capivasertib was also active in combination with fulvestrant in luminal-like metastatic breast cancer.Different membrane receptor inhibitors have shown activity in breast cancer, including monoclonal antibodies against human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), such as trastuzumab, margetuximab and pertuzumab; antibody–drug conjugates, such as ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1); immunotherapy that blocks programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) and/or programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1), such as atezolizumab and pembrolizumab; or drugs that target angiogenesis (such as the monoclonal antibody bevacizumab, which targets vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)). Tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as lapatinib, neratinib or tucatinib, among others, have shown activity in breast cancers that overexpress HER2. These drugs can block the activation of different signalling pathways such as the RAS–RAF–mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway or the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)–protein kinase B (AKT)–mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, which can also be blocked with small molecules such as everolimus or different PI3K inhibitors; the crosstalk between these pathways is an area of active research. Additionally, different poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors in patients with germline BRCA mutation-associated breast cancer have demonstrated good activity. The role of these agents in patients with somatic mutations is not known. EGF, epidermal growth factor; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; HGF, hepatocyte growth factor; MET, hepatocyte growth factor receptor; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; shRNA, short hairpin RNA; TCR, T cell receptor; TGF, transforming growth factor; VEGFR, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.Drugs that inhibit histone deacetylases, which are involved in chromatin remodelling and epigenetic regulation, have become a very interesting field of research. Indeed, a randomized phase III trial of entinostat in combination with endocrine therapy in patients with ER-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer based on the activity and toxicity profile exhibited (NCT02115282) is underway289. Another phase III trial with the oral subtype-selective histone deacetylase inhibitor chidamide has already shown interesting results with moderate toxicity69.

In HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer, new antibody–drug conjugates and monoclonal antibodies are being tested in phase II/III trials. DS-8201, a new anti-HER2 antibody-drug conjugated to a topoisomerase I inhibitor, has shown potent activity in vitro and in vivo290, and seems to be effective in patients with HER2-positive breast cancer who were previously treated with T-DM1 (ref.291) as well as in patients with advanced breast cancer with low HER2 expression. Margetuximab, an anti-HER2 Fc-optimized monoclonal antibody, has shown preliminary activity in heavily trastuzumab-pretreated patients in a phase I trial292. The phase III SOPHIA trial showed a significant but modest PFS improvement for margetuximab versus trastuzumab and a chemotherapy backbone in both arms293. New HER2-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as tucatinib (particularly in cases of brain metastases) and neratinib (particularly in cases of HER2-negative, HER2-mutant and HER2-positive breast cancer294) are also being developed. The phase III NALA trial showed significantly improved PFS but substantial gastrointestinal toxicity for neratinib versus lapatinib in a capecitabine combination in women with pretreated HER2-postitive advanced breast cancer295.

Due to the heterogeneity and the absence of clear drivers, the achievements in TNBC remain far behind other subtypes. The luminal androgen receptor subtype (Box 2) shares features with classic luminal-like hormone receptor-positive tumours; anti-androgens have been shown active in this patient population296,297. Additionally, in those patients with TNBC and BRCA germline mutations, two phase III trials have now demonstrated better efficacy and better tolerability and quality of life for PARP inhibitors compared with monochemotherapy30,31, building on earlier preliminary findings298.

Finally, although far behind in clinical development compared with other tumour types, immunotherapy has shown promise with immune checkpoint inhibitors such as pembrolizumab299 or atezolizumab300. For example, as mentioned, a first phase III trial showed a slightly improved PFS and preliminary evidence that atezolizumab combined with nab-paclitaxel may provide an overall survival benefit compared with the taxane alone in tumours with ≥1% PD-L1 immune cell staining249. Some of the biomarker assessment-based new drugs have already been approved, such as PD-L1 immunohistochemistry in TNBC for immunotherapy249, BRCA germline mutations for PARP inhibitors30,31 and PIK3CA mutations for PIK3 inhibitors301, whereas for others there is evidence but no specific approval, such as assessing HER2 mutations for neratinib302 or ESR1 mutation screening for resistance to aromatase inhibitors. Many of these assessments need further data to validate their clinical utility and technical standardization

Conclusions
The best end points to evaluate therapies in the advanced setting are debated. Research should determine optimal composite end points and incorporate patient-reported outcome measures. Dedicated quality-of-life tools to evaluate metastatic disease are urgently needed.

Additionally, the mechanisms underlying tumour resistance and how to overcome it are main topics of ongoing research. As therapies induce alterations of tumour biology, ongoing evaluation of disease status and active pathways is necessary throughout the cancer journey. Serial biopsies are very difficult to implement, and hope lies with liquid biopsies, functional imaging and new applications of nanotechnology. Knowing the driving pathway at every given moment will enable the correct determination of the optimal sequence of therapies, which currently is largely unknown for all advanced breast cancer subtypes. New techniques such as next-generation sequencing will continue to provide deeper knowledge of the biology of advanced disease but are not yet in play for individualized treatments. Furthermore, understanding the metastatic tropism of each tumour may enable future preventive measures. New targets (Fig. 11) and more efficient and/or less toxic therapies are needed to achieve the aim of personalized/precision medicine.

Apart from scientific advances, a deeper understanding of the needs of patients with advanced breast cancer and intense lobbying for their rights is crucial. In this regard, the ABC Global Alliance was created and is actively fighting for, among others, better survival and quality of life, accurate information, access to multidisciplinary and high-quality care, early access to supportive and palliative measures, financial support and ability to maintain or return to work. The ABC Charter, which is a comprehensive needs assessment of the field of advanced breast cancer, clearly highlights that much work is still needed and that intense collaboration between all stakeholders involved is crucial to improve the length and quality of life of all patients and perhaps one day be able to reach a cure for advanced breast cancer.
Abstract
Importance  Breast cancer will be diagnosed in 12% of women in the United States over the course of their lifetimes and more than 250 000 new cases of breast cancer were diagnosed in the United States in 2017. This review focuses on current approaches and evolving strategies for local and systemic therapy of breast cancer.

Observations  Breast cancer is categorized into 3 major subtypes based on the presence or absence of molecular markers for estrogen or progesterone receptors and human epidermal growth factor 2 (ERBB2; formerly HER2): hormone receptor positive/ERBB2 negative (70% of patients), ERBB2 positive (15%-20%), and triple-negative (tumors lacking all 3 standard molecular markers; 15%). More than 90% of breast cancers are not metastatic at the time of diagnosis. For people presenting without metastatic disease, therapeutic goals are tumor eradication and preventing recurrence. Triple-negative breast cancer is more likely to recur than the other 2 subtypes, with 85% 5-year breast cancer–specific survival for stage I triple-negative tumors vs 94% to 99% for hormone receptor positive and ERBB2 positive. Systemic therapy for nonmetastatic breast cancer is determined by subtype: patients with hormone receptor–positive tumors receive endocrine therapy, and a minority receive chemotherapy as well; patients with ERBB2-positive tumors receive ERBB2-targeted antibody or small-molecule inhibitor therapy combined with chemotherapy; and patients with triple-negative tumors receive chemotherapy alone. Local therapy for all patients with nonmetastatic breast cancer consists of surgical resection, with consideration of postoperative radiation if lumpectomy is performed. Increasingly, some systemic therapy is delivered before surgery. Tailoring postoperative treatment based on preoperative treatment response is under investigation. Metastatic breast cancer is treated according to subtype, with goals of prolonging life and palliating symptoms. Median overall survival for metastatic triple-negative breast cancer is approximately 1 year vs approximately 5 years for the other 2 subtypes.

Conclusions and Relevance  Breast cancer consists of 3 major tumor subtypes categorized according to estrogen or progesterone receptor expression and ERBB2 gene amplification. The 3 subtypes have distinct risk profiles and treatment strategies. Optimal therapy for each patient depends on tumor subtype, anatomic cancer stage, and patient preferences.
Abstract
Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths among women. The development of breast cancer is a multi-step process involving multiple cell types, and its prevention remains challenging in the world. Early diagnosis of breast cancer is one of the best approaches to prevent this disease. In some developed countries, the 5-year relative survival rate of breast cancer patients is above 80% due to early prevention. In the recent decade, great progress has been made in the understanding of breast cancer as well as in the development of preventative methods. The pathogenesis and tumor drug-resistant mechanisms are revealed by discovering breast cancer stem cells, and many genes are found related to breast cancer. Currently, people have more drug options for the chemoprevention of breast cancer, while biological prevention has been recently developed to improve patients' quality of life. In this review, we will summarize key studies of pathogenesis, related genes, risk factors and preventative methods on breast cancer over the past years. These findings represent a small step in the long fight against breast cancer.Introduction
Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers in women worldwide, accounting for approximately 570,000 deaths in 2015. Over 1.5 million women (25% of all women with cancer) are diagnosed with breast cancer every year throughout the world 1,2. In America, it is estimated that 30% of all new cancer cases (252,710) among women are breast cancer in 2017 3. Breast cancer is a metastatic cancer and can commonly transfer to distant organs such as the bone, liver, lung and brain, which mainly accounts for its incurability. Early diagnosis of the disease can lead to a good prognosis and a high survival rate. In North American, the 5-year relative survival rate of breast cancer patients is above 80% due to the timely detection of this disease 4. Mammography is a widely used screening approach in the detecting of breast cancer and proved to help reduce the mortality effectively. Other screening methods, such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), which is more sensitive than mammography, have also been implemented and studied during the last decade 5. There're numerous risk factors such as sex, aging, estrogen, family history, gene mutations and unhealthy lifestyle, which can increase the possibility of developing breast cancer 6. Most breast cancer occur in women and the number of cases is 100 times higher in women than that in men 3. Although the incidence rate of breast cancer in America increases year after year, the mortality rate decreases due to the widespread early screenings and advanced medical therapies. Biological therapies have been developed in recent years and proved to be beneficial for breast cancer. Here, we will focus on studies of the pathogenesis, related genes, risk factors and preventions of breast cancer over the past years.Pathogenesis
Breast tumors usually start from the ductal hyperproliferation, and then develop into benign tumors or even metastatic carcinomas after constantly stimulation by various carcinogenic factors. Tumor microenvironments such as the stromal influences or macrophages play vital roles in breast cancer initiation and progression. The mammary gland of rats could be induced to neoplasms when only the stroma was exposed to carcinogens, not the extracellular matrix or the epithelium 7,8. Macrophages can generate a mutagenic inflammatory microenvironment, which can promote angiogenesis and enable cancer cells to escape immune rejection 9,10. Different DNA methylation patterns have been observed between the normal and tumor-associated microenvironments, indicating that epigenetic modifications in the tumor microenvironment can promote the carcinogenesis 11,12. Recently, a new subclass of malignant cells within tumors called the cancer stem cells (CSCs) are observed and associated with tumor initiation, escape and recurrence. This small population of cells, which may develop from stem cells or progenitor cells in normal tissues, have self-renewal abilities and are resistant to conventional therapies such as chemotherapy and radiotherapy 13-15. Breast cancer stem cells (bCSCs) were first identified by Ai Hajj and even as few as 100 bCSCs could form new tumors in the immunocompromised mice 16. bCSCs are more likely to originate from luminal epithelial progenitors rather than from basal stem cells 17. Signaling pathways including Wnt, Notch, Hedgehog, p53, PI3K and HIF are involved in the self-renewal, proliferation and invasion of bCSCs 18-21. However, more studies are needed to understand bCSCs and to develop novel strategies to directly eliminate the bCSCs.

There're two hypothetical theories for breast cancer initiation and progression: the cancer stem cell theory and the stochastic theory 11,22. The cancer stem cell theory suggests that all tumor subtypes are derived from the same stem cells or transit-amplifying cells (progenitor cells). Acquired genetic and epigenetic mutations in stem cells or progenitor cells will lead to different tumor phenotypes (Figure ​(Figure1A).1A). The stochastic theory is that each tumor subtype is initiated from a single cell type (stem cell, progenitor cell, or differentiated cell) (Figure ​(Figure1B).1B). Random mutations can gradually accumulate in any breast cells, leading to their transformation into tumor cells when adequate mutations have accumulated. Although both theories are supported by plenty of data, neither can fully explain the origin of human breast cancer.Two hypothetical theories of breast cancer initiation and progression. (A) All subtypes of tumor are derived from the same stem cells or progenitor cells. Different tumor phenotypes are then determined by subtype-specific transforming events. (B) Each tumor subtype is initiated from a single cell type (stem cell, progenitor cell, or differentiated cell). Random mutations can gradually accumulate in any breast cells, leading to their transformation into tumor cells when an adequate number of mutations have accumulated.Genes related to breast cancer
Lots of genes have been identified in relation to breast cancer. Mutations and abnormal amplification of both oncogenes and anti-oncogenes play key roles in the processes of tumor initiation and progression.

BRCA1/2
Breast cancer associated gene 1 and 2 (BRCA1 and BRCA2) are two famous anti-oncogenes for breast cancer risk. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are located on chromosome 17q21 and 13q12, respectively. They both encode tumor suppressor proteins. BRCA1 deficiency leads to the dysregulation of cell cycle checkpoint, abnormal centrosome duplication, genetic instability and eventually apoptosis 23,24. BRCA1 expression is repressed by “pocket proteins” such as p130, p107 and the retinoblastoma protein in an E2F-dependent manner. The BRCA1 gene has been shown to form a loop between the promoter, introns, and terminator regions, which regulates the expression of this gene via interactions with its own promoter 25,26. BRCA2 protein regulates recombinational repair in DNA double-strand breaks by interacting with RAD51 and DMC1 27,28. BRCA2-associated breast cancers are more likely to be high-grade invasive ductal carcinomas, but with a luminal phenotype 29. The risk of breast cancer could be increased greatly if an individual inherits deleterious mutations in either BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes. BRCA1/2 mutations are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner even though the second allele is normal. Totally, about 20-25% of hereditary breast cancers and 5-10% of all breast cancers are caused by BRCA1/2 mutations 30,31. A meta-analysis by Chen showed that the breast cancer risk ratio in women older than 70 years carrying BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations was 57% and 49%, respectively 32.

HER2
Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, also known as c-erbB-2, is an important oncogene in breast cancer and located on the long arm of human chromosome 17 (17q12). The homologene in mice is Neu, which was first identified in 3-methylcholanthrene induced rat neuroblastoma cells 33. The expression of HER2 gene is activated mainly through the gene amplification and re-arrangement. HER2 protein is an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) of tyrosine kinase family and form heterodimers with other ligand-bound EGFR family members such as Her3 and Her4, thus to activate downstream signaling pathways 34. Knockout of HER2 in mouse models disrupts normal mammary duct formation. Overexpression of HER2, which is detected in about 20% of primary breast cancers, increases the number of cancer stem cells by PTEN/Akt/mTORC1 signaling, and indicates poor clinical outcomes 35,36.

Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR)
EGFR, also known as c-erbB-1 or Her1 in humans, is located on the short arm of chromosome 7 (7p12). The EGFR protein is a cell surface glycoprotein of tyrosine kinase family and is activated by binding to EGF, TGF-α, amphiregulin, betacellulin and so on. The downstream signaling pathways of EGFR including PI3K, Ras-Raf-MAPK and JNK are triggered to promote cell proliferation, cell invasion, angiogenesis and to protect cells against apoptosis 37, 38. Overexpression of EGFR is found in more than 30% of cases of the inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), a very aggressive subtype of breast cancer. Patients with EGFR-positive IBC have a poorer prognosis than those with EGFR-negative tumors 39,40. More than half of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cases, characterized by the absence of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) expression and HER2 amplification, also have EGFR overexpression 41. Therefore, targeting the EGFR pathway might be a promising therapy for these malignant tumors.

c-Myc
This gene is located on the long arm of chromosome 8 (8q24) and encodes for the Myc protein, a transcription factor containing the bHLH/LZ (basic Helix-Loop-Helix Leucine Zipper) domain. Genome-wide screening shows that 15% of all genes are regulated by the Myc protein mainly through binding on the E-box consensus (CACGTG) and recruiting histone acetyltransferases (HATs) or DNA methyltransferases 42,43. Some of the Myc-regulated genes such as MTA1, hTERT and PEG10 play vital roles in breast cancer initiation and progression. The overexpression of c-Myc is predominantly observed in the high-grade, invasive stage of breast carcinomas, while no c-Myc amplification is detected in the benign tissues 44, 45.Ras
There're three members in the Ras gene family: H-ras, K-ras and N-ras, located on the chromosome of 11 (11p15), 12 (12p12) and 1 (1p22) respectively. The proteins encoded by these genes are extremely homologous, and they belong to the small guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding protein (G protein) superfamily 46. Point mutations are commonly associated with the overexpression of these three human Ras genes, and most are missense mutations located at the coding domain for GTP binding. Though mutations of Ras proteins are infrequently in breast cancer (<5%), the abnormality of Ras signal transduction pathway are observed in both benign and malignant mammary tissues 47. H-ras can cooperate with B lymphoma moloney murine leukaemia virus insertion region-1 (BMI1) to promote proliferation, invasion, and to inhibit apoptosis in breast cancer cells 48. H-ras overexpression is detected in both primary and advanced breast cancer patients, indicating a poor prognosis 49, 50.Aging
Besides sex, aging is one of the most important risk factors of breast cancer, because the incidence of breast cancer is highly related to the increasing age. In 2016, approximately 99.3% and 71.2% of all breast cancer-associated deaths in America were reported in women over the age of 40 and 60, respectively 3. Therefore, it is necessary to have a mammography screening ahead of time in women aged 40 or older.

Family history
Nearly a quarter of all breast cancer cases are related to family history 65. Women, whose mother or sister has a breast cancer, are prone to this disease. A cohort study of over 113,000 women in UK demonstrated that women with one first-degree relative with breast cancer have a 1.75-fold higher risk of developing this disease than women without any affected relatives. Moreover, the risk becomes 2.5-fold or higher in women with two or more first-degree relatives with breast cancer 65. The inherited susceptibility to breast cancer is partially attributed to the mutations of breast cancer related genes such as BRCA1 and BRCA2.

Reproductive factors
Reproductive factors such as early menarche, late menopause, late age at first pregnancy and low parity can increase the breast cancer risk. Each 1-year delay in menopause increases the risk of breast cancer by 3%. Each 1-year delay in menarche or each additional birth decreases the risk of breast cancer by 5% or 10%, respectively 66-68. A recent Norwegian cohort study showed that a hazard ratio (HR) is 1.54 between late (≥35 years) and early (<20 years) age at first birth 69. Reproductive factors are strongly associated with the ER status, with differences in the odds ratios (OR) between ER+ and ER- breast cancer for parity (OR: 0.7 vs. 0.9 for ≥3 births vs. nulliparae) and age at the first birth (OR: 1.6 vs. 1.2 for age ≥30 vs. <25 years) 70.

Estrogen
Both endogenous and exogenous estrogens are associated with the risk of breast cancer. The endogenous estrogen is usually produced by the ovary in premenopausal women and ovariectomy can reduce the risk of breast cancer 71. The main sources of exogenous estrogen are the oral contraceptives and the hormone replacement therapy (HRT). The oral contraceptives have been widely used since 1960s and the formulations have been upgraded to reduce side-effects. However, the OR is still higher than 1.5 for African American women and Iranian populations 72,73. Nevertheless, oral contraceptives do not increase the risk of breast cancer in women who stop to use them for more than 10 years 66. HRT involves the administration of exogenous estrogen or other hormones for the menopausal or postmenopausal women. A number of studies have shown that the use of HRT can increase the breast cancer risk. The Million Women Study in UK reported a relative risk (RR) of 1.66 between current users of HRT and those who never used it 74. A cohort study of 22,929 women in Asia demonstrated HRs of 1.48 and 1.95 after HRT use for 4 and 8 years, respectively 75. However, the risk of breast cancer has been shown to significantly decrease after two years of stopping HRT 76. The recurrence rate is also high among breast cancer survivors who take HRT, and the HR for a new breast tumor is 3.6 77. Since the adverse effects of HRT were published in 2003 based on the Women's Health Initiative randomized controlled trial, the incidence rate of breast cancer in America has decreased by approximately 7% due to the reduction in the use of HRT 78.

Lifestyle
Modern lifestyles such as excessive alcohol consumption and too much dietary fat intake can increase the risk of breast cancer. Alcohol consumption can elevate the level of estrogen-related hormones in the blood and trigger the estrogen receptor pathways. A meta-analysis based on 53 epidemiological studies indicated that an intake of 35-44 grams of alcohol per day can increase the risk of breast cancer by 32%, with a 7.1% increase in the RR for each additional 10 grams of alcohol per day 79,80. Modern western diet contains too much fat and excess intake of fat, especially the saturated fat, is associated with mortality (RR=1.3) and poor prognosis in breast cancer patients 81. Although the relationship between smoking and breast cancer risk remains controversial, mutagens from cigarette smoke have been detected in the breast fluid from non-lactating women. The risk of breast cancer is also elevated in women who both smoke and drink (RR=1.54) 82. Up to now, accumulating evidences demonstrate that smoking, especially at an early age, has a higher risk on breast cancer occurrence 83-86.Preventions
Thus far, great advances have been made in clinical and theoretical studies of breast cancer (Figure ​(Figure2).2). The current prevention methods including screening, chemoprevention and biological prevention are more direct and effective than those in the past (Figure ​(Figure2).2). The mortality of breast cancer has decreased. However, breast cancer is still the first leading cause of cancer death among females aged 20-59 years.

Screening
Not primary tumors but the tumor metastasis causes over 90% of cancer deaths 87. However, if breast cancer is diagnosed as a primary tumor or at an early stage of metastasis, the breast tumor could be removed by surgery and the chemotherapy could work effectively. Early detection is the cornerstone of breast cancer prevention. Mammography is an effective screening method to use low energy X-rays to obtain high-resolution images of the breast. The entire testing process only lasts for 20 minutes and it does not require any contrast-enhancing agent. Since the first recommendation for breast cancer screening by Professor Forrest, over 70% of women (aged 50-74 years) in America have been undergone breast cancer screening via mammography every 2 years 88. A meta-analysis of 11 randomized trials showed that women aged 50-70 years had a significant reduction in breast cancer mortality after screening with mammography (RR=0.81) 89. However, the reduction in mortality rate was not significant in women aged 40-49 years 90. These results indicate the importance of mammography screening programs. Although the reported percentage of overdiagnosis due to mammography varies across trials, overdiagnosis is undoubtedly a serious problem that cannot be ignored during breast cancer screening.

MRI is another widely used screening tool for breast cancer. It is more sensitive than mammography in high-risk women, especially in detecting the invasive ductal carcinoma 91. Compared to mammography, MRI is not affected by the breast density and has advantages in detecting occult primary breast cancer, axillary nodal metastasis, residual tumors after neoadjuvant chemotherapy or other small tumors 92. Advanced MRI scanners can measure tissues as small as 0.5 mm3. However, there's no identified benefit of MRI in patient outcomes such as in the rate of detection of ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence and contralateral breast cancer incidence. The specificity of MRI is much poorer than that of mammography, with detection rates ranging from 37% to 100% 93. Women with a family history of breast cancer have an approximately 20-25% or higher lifetime risk of breast cancer as demonstrated by MRI screening 94. Each coin has two sides, and we should balance both the goodness and weakness. Considering its sensitivity, MRI may be a useful choice in high risk groups when the mammography results are normal.

Chemoprevention
The classical definition of chemotherapy by Sporn is “the use of pharmacologic or natural agents that inhibit the development of invasive breast cancer either by blocking the DNA damage that initiates carcinogenesis, or by arresting or reversing the progression of premalignant cells in which such damage has already occurred.” 95. Estrogen receptor is a major target for chemotherapy because more than 70% of breast cancers are ER-positive breast cancers. Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) and the aromatase inhibitors (AIs) are two major classes of anti-estrogen drugs. SERMs are compounds that act as either agonists or antagonists of estrogen receptors. One of the most famous SERMs is tamoxifen (TAM), which has been used to treat breast cancer for more than 30 years 96. Regardless of the number, the scale, the related areas or the time lasting in the follow-up visit of TAM's research, this drug has no doubt the most abundant clinical data in SERMs. Meanwhile, TAM is used to treat all stages of breast cancer 97. Many large-scale trials including the Breast Cancer Prevention Trial (NSABP-1), the Royal Marsden Prevention Trial, the Italian Prevention Trial and the International Breast Cancer Intervention Study (IBIS-I Trial) have shown that TAM could reduce the risk of both invasive and non-invasive breast cancer. Despite the differences in data collection and study design, all these trials have demonstrated greater than 30% reduction in ER-positive breast cancer after 5 years treatment with TAM. However, no significant reduction has been observed in ER-negative tumors 98,99. Nevertheless, there're some side-effects of TAM therapy. The risk of endometrial cancer, stroke, pulmonary embolism, and deep-vein thrombosis is increased in TAM-treated patients, and the risk is especially high among women older than 50 100. Therefore, TAM should be used individually by balancing between its toxicity and benefits.

Raloxifene, a second generation of SERMs with fewer side-effects than TAM, has been approved for the treatment of invasive breast cancer in postmenopausal women as well as osteoporosis and heart disease 101. However, raloxifene shows no effect on ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS). The Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) trials showed that raloxifene was less effective than TAM 99. Considering its less risk in endometrial cancers and thromboembolic complications, raloxifene is still a good therapeutic option for the invasive breast cancer. Several third generations of SERMs such as ospemifen, arzoxifene, lasofoxifene (LFX) and bazedoxifene (BZA) have also been discovered, but only BZA has reached the stage of clinical use. BZA has demonstrated potent effects in pre-clinical studies, but its efficacy was limited in pivotal clinical trials 102.

Recently, AIs are being used instead of TAM as the first line therapy in postmenopausal breast cancer patients. AIs reduce the plasma levels of estrogens by inhibiting aromatase, an enzyme that catalyzes the biosynthesis of estrogen from androgen 103. There're two classes of AIs: steroidal inhibitors and non-steroidal inhibitors. Compared with exemestane, a steroidal inhibitor, non-steroidal inhibitors such as anastrozole and letrozole can bind to the enzyme's active site reversibly. However, these three third-generation AIs (exemestane, anastrozole and letrozole) have no significant differences in terms of efficacy in preventing breast cancer. Many trials such as the Italian Tamoxifen Anastrozole (ITA) trial, Intergroup Exemestane Study (IES), Austrian Breast and Colorectal Cancer Study Group (ABCSG-8), and the Breast International Group (BIG) 1-98 study have showed that in the adjuvant setting, AIs are more potent than TAM in reducing the incidence of breast cancer both as upfront monotherapy and after 2-3 years treatment with tamoxifen 104-110. A 10-year ATAC trial study indicated fewer serious side-effects for anastrozole than for tamoxifen in postmenopausal women with early ER+ breast cancer 111. However, there're some limitations of AIs. Because AIs inhibit the biosynthesis of estrogen, they are typically used only in postmenopausal women. The main side-effect of AIs is that they can increase the risk of osteoporosis, which is a significant health threat for older women. Other side-effects, such as joint pain and stiffness, incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome or dysregulated lipid metabolism, have also been reported for AIs, but these side-effects have a lower impact on the quality of life of patients than endometrial cancer and thromboembolic complications associated with TAM treatment. Acquired resistance to AIs has been observed after prolonged treatment, which also occurs in the case of SERMs. Crosstalks between estrogen receptor pathway and several signaling pathways such as PI3K/Akt/mTOR and Ras/Raf/MEK/MAPK could lead cancer cells to be resistant to AIs 112. The combination of AIs and inhibitors of the related signaling pathways may be a promising strategy for AI-resistant patients.

Biological prevention
Recently, biological prevention, mainly known as the monoclonal antibodies for the breast cancer, has been developed to improve the quality of life in breast cancer patients. One of the major targets of these monoclonal antibodies is HER2. About 20-30% of all breast cancer cases exhibit HER2 protein overexpression or HER2 gene amplification 36. Trastuzumab (Herceptin), a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody, is the first HER2-targeted drug to be approved by the FDA. It can directly interact with the C-terminal portion of domain IV in the extracellular part of HER2 113,114. Up to now, the anti-tumor mechanism of trastuzumab has not been clearly elucidated. Some potential mechanisms may be that trastuzumab can suppress the growth and proliferation of cancer cells by recruiting ubiquitin to internalize and degrade HER2, by activating the immune system against cancer cells via a mechanism called antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) or by inhibiting the MAPK and PI3K/Akt pathways 115-117. Trastuzumab was initially used for treating metastatic breast cancer (MBC) and found to be efficacious as a single agent with an objective response rate (ORR) of 26%. In vitro experiments have shown that trastuzumab has a synergistic effect with other anti-tumor drugs such as nimotuzumab, carboplatin, 4-hydroxycyclophosphamide, docetaxel and vinorelbine 118,119. The HERA and TRAIN trials demonstrated that chemotherapy combined with adjuvant trastuzumab for 1 year could improve the disease-free survival in patients with HER2+ breast cancer (HR=0.76) 120,121. A randomized phase II trial executed by Marty also showed that trastuzumab plus docetaxel was more efficacious than docetaxel alone in treating HER2-positive MBC, with the ORR of 50% versus 32% 122. However, side-effects such as congestive heart failure and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) decline were found in trastuzumab-treated patients 123.

Similar to trastuzumab, pertuzumab (Perjeta), another humanized monoclonal antibody, can bind to the extracellular portion of HER2 like trastuzumab. However, the binding domain is different 124. Pertuzumab combined with trastuzumab and docetaxel has been approved for treating HER2-positive breast cancer. The pathologic complete response (pCR) rate, as well as invasive-disease-free survival rate, significantly increased in HER+ tumors than those in HER- tumors (57.8% versus 22.0%) 125,126. However, toxic side-effects like diarrhea and febrile neutropenia were common in pertuzumab-treated groups.

Recently, immunotherapy becomes a hot spot in cancer therapy, and it shows great potential in clinical use. Programmed cell death 1 (PD1) is a membrane protein expressed in various immune cells, including T cells, which can be engaged by its specific ligand to block the immune system. PD1 inhibitor drugs Nivolumab (Opdivo) and Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) were approved for the treatment of several solid tumors such as metastatic melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer. In the KEYNOTE-012 study, pembrolizumab was found to be effective in 27 TNBC patients with a clinical benefit rate of 20% 127. Programmed cell death receptor ligand 1 (PDL1), a ligand of PD1, is detected in 20% of TNBC and in 50% of all breast cancers 128. PDL1 inhibitor drug Atezolizumab (Tecentriq) exhibits a 19% of objective response rate in a phase Ⅰ study including 54 TNBC patients 129. Though TNBC patients typically have poor clinical outcomes, anti-PD1/PDL1 drugs might be promising strategies for treating this subtype of breast cancer.Conclusion and further directions
Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in women across 140 countries 1. Approximately 1 in 8 women worldwide have a lifetime risk of developing breast cancer 130. Breast cancer develops through a multistep process, and the pathogenesis of this disease has not yet been elucidated. In the last decade, the tumor microenvironment and breast CSCs have been identified as contributors to breast tumorigenesis. Breast cancer is also influenced by genetic and environmental factors. Targeted prevention strategies against these risk factors should be taken ahead of time.

Although the incidence rate of breast cancer is high in developed countries, the fact which we can't ignore is that almost half of the breast cancer cases and over half of deaths occur in developing countries. The 5-year relative survival rates of breast cancer varied widely in developed and developing countries. The rate is over 80% in North American and Japan, but below 40% in Africa countries like Algeria. Breast cancer is a preventable disease, and there are adequate medical resources available in developed countries, which can protect against this disease, such as annual mammography screening or the daily use of chemopreventative drugs. These may be attributable for the higher survival rate of breast cancer patients in developed countries than that in middle-income or low-income countries. Considering the financial burden of developing countries, the clinical breast examination is an effective way to diagnose breast cancer in the early stage. Moreover, if women are educated about breast cancer, breast self-examination may be a simple, economical and motivated method to prevent this disease. People know their own bodies more clearly than any doctors. However, most of the women in developing countries don't realize the importance of breast cancer prevention. Therefore, in these countries, more attention should be focused on breast health promotion ahead of clinical treatment.

Nowadays, with the reduction in the cost of DNA sequencing, individual genome sequencing may be affordable by middle-class populations, and this could be a new method in preventing breast cancer. If a woman have a family history of breast cancer, it is wise to do a screen especially on hereditary cancer susceptibility genes such as BRCA1 or BRCA2. The risk of breast cancer could then be evaluated based on the screening results and prevention advice could be offered personally. Individual genome sequencing may be a mainstream in the future for prevention of breast cancer as well as other hereditary disease. Additionally, risk factors should be taken more seriously either in normal or high-risk women. Environmental factors such as the exogenous estrogen intake, alcohol abuse and excess dietary fat consumption could be avoided to minimize breast cancer risk. Though some risk facts such as aging and reproductive factors are inevitable, measures should be taken ahead of time to reduce the risk. In the modern world, many people spend countless hours sitting at tables. People are more engaged in mental work rather than in physical work. However, physically active women have a 25% lower risk of breast cancer on average than women who are less active 131. Regular physical exercise may be a convenient and inexpensive way to prevent breast cancer in women from both developed and developing countries.

Although traditional film mammography has limitations in detecting dense breasts, digital mammography can overcome this deficiency. It can capture images directly through an X-ray-sensitive detector and the digital data are analyzed in the computer. The Digital Mammographic Imaging Screening Trial (DMIST) showed that digital mammography had a better diagnostic performance than film mammography in pre- and perimenopausal women with dense breasts who were younger than 50 years of age. With advancements in digital technology, high-resolution digital mammography may replace film mammography in the future 132. What's more, both mammography and MRI screening for a large population of women are expensive and only countries with good health insurance systems can offer these services. Direct breast ultrasonography, an adjuvant technique method to mammography and MRI, is less expensive and could be used widely in low- and middle-income countries. The ultrasonography is much more accurate if the operator is skilled and experienced.

Although great progress has been made in breast cancer prevention in the last decade, there is still a lack of effective therapies against TNBC. TNBC tends to have a higher relapse risk and is more aggressive than other subtypes, resulting in a poor 5-year survival rate 133. Due to the absence of ER/PR expression and HER2 amplification, drugs targeted against these three receptors are useless in TNBC. In the last decade, several potential biomarkers in TNBC such as EGFR, androgen receptor (AR), PARP and mTOR, and microRNA-based biomarkers, such as miR-374b-5p and miR-629-3p have been identified and explored for targeted therapies 134-136. The EGFR-inhibitor cetuximab combined with cisplatin increased the progression-free survival from 1.5 to 3.7 months, and the overall survival from 9.4 to 12.9 months in a phase Ⅱ clinical trial 137. Expressions of AR is observed in 30% of TNBC patients, and the AR inhibitor bicalutaminde showed a clinical benefit rate of 19% in ER/PR negative breast cancer patients in a phase Ⅱ study 138,139. PARP-inhibitor iniparib plus chemotherapy were also tested and showed promising results in phase Ⅰ and Ⅱ clinical trials. However, the phase III clinical trial failed with the lack of improvement in progression-free survival and overall survival 140. Targeting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway was thought to be an effective strategy to treat TNBC recently, and the mTOR inhibitor everolimus combined with doxorubicin and bevacizumab increased the objective response rate but not the clinical benefit rate 141. Although many biomarker-based trials have been performed in TNBC, none has been successful finally. One of the main reasons for this failure could be the heterogeneity of TNBC. More work is needed to elucidate tumor heterogeneity, and the discovery of a robust biomarker regardless of tumor heterogeneity may be a breakthrough in TNBC treatment. Immunotherapy agents such as anti-PD1/PDL1 drugs will also shed light on treating TNBC.

In summary, breast cancer is preventable. Reducing risk factors and taking chemoprevention are two main measures to prevent breast cancer. However, there's a long way to go in creating public breast cancer awareness. Only 4.1% of high-risk women are willing to take chemoprevention drugs 142. The fear of adverse effects and lack of understanding of breast cancer might be attributable for this unwillingness. Although, the Gail model or the IBIS model is widely used for determining the risk of breast cancer based on a woman's age, family history, race and reproductive factors, we still lack a reliable strategy to exactly evaluate the risk ratio of breast cancer. With improvements in sequencing technology, individual genome sequencing may be a powerful method to evaluate the risk of breast cancer. Better medicines with less adverse effects and a favorable risk-benefit ratio need to be developed in the future.

​Screening for Breast Cancer
Abstract
Context Breast cancer screening in community practices may be different from that in randomized controlled trials. New screening modalities are becoming available.

Objectives To review breast cancer screening, especially in the community and to examine evidence about new screening modalities.

Data Sources and Study Selection English-language articles of randomized controlled trials assessing effectiveness of breast cancer screening were reviewed, as well as meta-analyses, systematic reviews, studies of breast cancer screening in the community, and guidelines. Also, studies of newer screening modalities were assessed.

Data Synthesis All major US medical organizations recommend screening mammography for women aged 40 years and older. Screening mammography reduces breast cancer mortality by about 20% to 35% in women aged 50 to 69 years and slightly less in women aged 40 to 49 years at 14 years of follow-up. Approximately 95% of women with abnormalities on screening mammograms do not have breast cancer with variability based on such factors as age of the woman and assessment category assigned by the radiologist. Studies comparing full-field digital mammography to screen film have not shown statistically significant differences in cancer detection while the impact on recall rates (percentage of screening mammograms considered to have positive results) was unclear. One study suggested that computer-aided detection increases cancer detection rates and recall rates while a second larger study did not find any significant differences. Screening clinical breast examination detects some cancers missed by mammography, but the sensitivity reported in the community is lower (28% to 36%) than in randomized trials (about 54%). Breast self-examination has not been shown to be effective in reducing breast cancer mortality, but it does increase the number of breast biopsies performed because of false-positives. Magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasound are being studied for screening women at high risk for breast cancer but are not recommended for screening the general population. Sensitivity of magnetic resonance imaging in high-risk women has been found to be much higher than that of mammography but specificity is generally lower. Effect of the magnetic resonance imaging on breast cancer mortality is not known. A balanced discussion of possible benefits and harms of screening should be undertaken with each woman.

Conclusions In the community, mammography remains the main screening tool while the effectiveness of clinical breast examination and self-examination are less. New screening modalities are unlikely to replace mammography in the near future for screening the general population.

Breast cancer screening, especially with mammography, has been recommended for many decades,1 and the majority of women older than 40 years in the United States participate in screening activities.2,3 Meanwhile, new screening modalities have been introduced, and some of these have been increasingly incorporated into community practice. However, none of the new technologies has been evaluated for its effect on breast cancer mortality.

Community practice of screening may differ from the care provided within randomized clinical trials and is less often discussed in review articles. Reviews of breast cancer screening usually emphasize efficacy and results of randomized trials, particularly those involving screen-film mammography.4-7Efficacy of a screening tool is measured in experimental studies under ideal circumstances.8 In contrast, effectiveness is defined as the extent to which a specific intervention “when deployed in the field in routine circumstances, does what it is intended to do for a specific population.”8

We systematically reviewed what is known about the community practice of mammography, clinical breast examination, and breast self-examination, when possible, comparing the results from community studies with those of randomized clinical trials. In addition, we reviewed what is known about newer screening modalities, specifically digital mammography, computer-aided detection programs for mammography, ultrasound, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

Methods
The evaluation of screening modalities, especially in the community setting, is challenging for methodological, clinical, and ethical reasons. Randomized clinical trials are considered the gold standard for evaluating a new screening test. The long-term breast cancer mortality rate of women randomized to receive a new screening test is compared with that of women randomized to receive standard care. However, such trials are difficult to conduct. They require tens of thousands of women who need to be followed up for more than 15 years. Furthermore, because mammography screening has been shown to be effective in some trials, it would likely be even more difficult to demonstrate any additional efficacy of new tests. Finally, as treatment for breast cancer has improved over time,9-11 the impact of screening on breast cancer mortality may be increasingly difficult to establish.

Because of these challenges, new screening tests are often first studied by establishing characteristics of the tests themselves, rather than by studying their effect on patient outcome such as breast cancer mortality. Important test characteristics include sensitivity, specificity, safety, cost, simplicity, and patient and clinician acceptability. We review what test characteristics have been studied and the findings for each new modality. We also indicate the study design and the end points studied for each screening test. Although it is important to use resources wisely when considering a screening test for a large segment of the population, cost-effectiveness analyses are not reviewed.

It is important to determine the characteristics of a screening test in a community setting if the test is to be used in that setting. However, test characteristics of new modalities are usually evaluated among women for whom the rate of breast cancer is higher than average, such as women at increased risk of breast cancer or women in a diagnostic setting with breast symptoms or known breast abnormalities. The reported sensitivity and specificity of a test in these high-risk women may be different from the sensitivity and specificity of the same test used in a general screening population.12 We therefore indicate if a test has been evaluated as a diagnostic or screening test and if as a screening test, whether it has been evaluated in women thought to be at increased risk or in the general population.

For this review, searches of MEDLINE, The Cochrane Library, the National Guideline Clearinghouse Web site, the US Preventive Services Task Force recommendations and reviews,5,13 and the International Agency for Research on Cancer Handbook of Cancer Prevention (IARC)4 were performed to identify English-language articles about breast cancer screening. Examples of search terms included mass screeningandbreast and then the specific modality (eg, mammography, breast examination, digital mammography, computer assisted diagnosis or computer aided detection, magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound or ultrasonography). The bibliographies of retrieved articles were also scanned to retrieve additional relevant articles. Details regarding search terms are available from the authors.

Results
Screening Mammography
Eight reported randomized trials have studied mammography’s effectiveness in the United States,14,15 Sweden,16-20 Canada,21,22 and the United Kingdom.23 Concerns related to flaws of these randomized clinical trials have been raised.24,25 In-depth independent reviews of the criticisms of the trials have concluded that these flaws do not negate mammography’s efficacy in reducing breast cancer mortality, especially in women aged 50 to 69 years.4,5,7,26 Trials comparing mammography with or without clinical breast examination to usual care (with little or no screening mammography) demonstrated remarkably consistent results for women older than 50 years. Meta-analyses that included all trials demonstrated statistically significant reductions of 20% to 35% in mortality from breast cancer for women aged 50 to 69 years.7 The majority of participants in clinical trials of mammography were white and information on BRCA mutation status was not known.

In general, breast cancers detected by mammography screening are smaller and have more favorable histological and biological features than tumors detected between mammography screening rounds or tumors found outside of screening.27-32 Because the favorable prognoses of women with breast cancer detected by mammography screening may be attributable to selection bias, length bias, lead-time bias, and overdiagnosis,33,34 randomized controlled trials with breast cancer mortality as the outcome have been particularly important in excluding such biases.

The benefit of screening women in their 40s is slower to appear and is somewhat less than that of women older than 50 years. Women in their 40s have a lower incidence of disease, denser breast tissue (which can lower the sensitivity of mammography), and, on average, faster-growing cancers.27,35,36 A randomized trial of mammography screening for women in their early 40s is under way in the United Kingdom.37 Clinicians and patients are often surprised at the large number of women who need to be screened to prevent 1 death due to breast cancer. For example, it has been estimated that between 500 and 1800 women who are 40 years of age would need to undergo regular screening mammography to prevent 1 breast cancer death after 14 to 20 years.7,13

Randomized trials have included few or no women older than 70 years. One case-control study found that screening women between 65 and 74 years of age was associated with mortality reduction.38 Pooled data from a community study showed that the sensitivity and specificity of screening mammography were highest in older women, especially those older than 80 years.36 Screening mammography may not be beneficial for women with significant comorbidity or with a life expectancy of less than 5 years, and may actually necessitate work-up that does not result in any benefit.39-41 However, if a woman is in reasonably good health and would be eligible for and interested in treatment, continued screening should be supported. Encouraging individualized decisions may be especially appropriate for women older than 70 years.42

The majority of women with abnormalities noted on screening mammograms (≈ 95%) do not have breast cancer with variability based on multiple factors including the radiologist’s assessment and the woman’s age.7 Because the risk of breast cancer increases with age, the likelihood of a woman with an abnormal mammogram result having cancer also increases with age.43,44 On the other hand, having a normal mammogram result does not rule out the possibility of having breast cancer, because false-negative mammography examination results do occur. In such cases, either the cancer is not visible on mammography examination or the radiologist fails to notice the lesion prospectively.45-47

Results from 7 population-based community screening programs in the United States on 463 372 screening mammograms revealed an overall sensitivity of 75.0% and specificity of 92.3%.36 A sensitivity of 75% means that 25% of women (or 25 of 100 women) who were diagnosed with breast cancer had normal mammogram results between 12 and 24 months before their cancer diagnosis (eg, false-negative examination result). This sensitivity of 75% in the community was similar to that reported in the randomized trials (68% to 88%) but the specificity was lower than in most of the trials (range, 82%-93% for Canadian National Breast Screening Study 1 to 98.5% for Health Insurance Plan of New York).48

Breast density and age are important predictors of accuracy.36 Adjusted sensitivity ranged from 63% in women with extremely dense breasts to 87% in women with almost entirely fatty breasts; adjusted sensitivity increased with age from 69% in women aged 40 through 49 years to 83% in women aged 80 through 89 years.36 Adjusted specificity increased from 89% in women with extremely dense breasts to 97% in women with almost entirely fatty breasts.36

Guidelines for quality assurance have been issued by several bodies, such as the Commission of the European Communities49,50 and the US Mammography Quality Standards Act.51 The Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System, used in the United States to standardize reports, includes categories for assessment ranging from 0 to 552 (Table 1). The associated likelihood ratios for a breast cancer diagnosis for first screen are shown in the table.54 Use of the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System has not eliminated the variability among radiologists55 that had been noted before.56,57

Large differences have been noted between the recall rates (or percentage of screening mammograms considered as positive) of community-based mammography programs in the United States and those in other countries. The recall rate in the United States is twice the recall rate in the United Kingdom (eg, 12.5%-14.4% vs 7.6%), with no difference in cancer detection rate.58 Elmore et al59 noted comparable differences between North American screening programs and those in other locations, which persisted after adjusting for differences such as age of women screened, use of single vs double reading, and use of 1 vs 2 views of each breast for examinations. Other possible reasons for the regional variability noted include differences in the characteristics of the population screened (eg, presence of risk factors or symptoms) and features of the mammography examination (eg, equipment type and year, technician training).59,60 The experience of the physician interpreting the mammograms has also been raised as a possible reason for the variability.60-62 Recommendations vary regarding the minimum number of mammograms that the physician should interpret yearly, from 480 in the United States50 to 5000 in the United Kingdom.51 Educational training has been shown to improve sensitivity with no change in specificity.63 Finally, features of the health care system, including malpractice concerns, financial incentives, quality control procedures, and auditing procedures, may be related to some of the variability.60

Double-reading of films, where 2 or more radiologists interpret each film, is offered in some US screening programs and in about half of the other countries that use mammography screening.4,58 However, double reading is performed in various ways (eg, 2 interpretations may be completely independent, 2 radiologists may perform interpretations together, or a third reader may serve as a tie-breaker). A systematic review of 10 cohort studies found that double reading increased the cancer detection rate by 3 to 11 per 10 000 women screened; recall rates increased or decreased depending on the method of double reading used.64 The heterogeneity of the definitions of double reading and of screening practices precludes an accurate assessment of benefits and harms.

Full-Field Digital Mammography and Computer-Aided Detection Programs
Both screen-film mammography and full-field digital mammography use x-rays to obtain images. With screen-film mammography the image is captured on film; with full-field digital mammography the image is captured digitally. Digital images can then be printed on film for viewing, or the images can be interpreted directly from a computer monitor. The digital acquisition process improves logistics and work flow by allowing electronic transmission, storage, and retrieval. Radiologists viewing the image on a monitor can alter the contrast and brightness of the image and magnify specific areas without additional x-ray exposure. Digital imaging also allows easier use of computer-aided detection software. One disadvantage, however, is the increased cost associated with full-field digital mammography.4

Three community-based studies have compared full-field digital mammography to screen-film mammography (Table 2). Two studies found the sensitivity of full-field digital mammography (64% and 74%) to be less than that of screen-film mammography (79%, 90%), but these studies had a small number of women with breast cancer (42 and 31, respectively) and the display systems and experience of radiologists may have improved since these studies.65,66,70 A larger randomized study reported similar cancer detection rates (per all screened), with higher recall rates for full-field digital mammography.67 A trial now being conducted, which aimed to enroll 49 400 women, will compare the diagnostic accuracy of full-field digital mammography from 4 different manufacturers with that of traditional screen-film mammography.71

Computer-aided detection programs, which recognize patterns in breast images associated with cancer (Figure 1), may potentially help radiologists improve their diagnostic accuracy, but presently data are limited (Table 2).68,69,72,73 Computer programs that can mark calcifications, masses, or other potential lesions on the mammogram may increase the number of cancers detected compared with unassisted interpretations. In a study of 12 860 women,68 computer-aided detection increased radiologists’ overall screening recall rate from 6.5% to 7.7% while increasing the number of cancers detected from 41 without computer-aided detection to 49 with the technology. However, in the largest clinical series to date, which included 59 139 mammograms interpreted with computer-aided detection and 56 432 interpreted without, recall rates and cancer detection rates did not differ significantly.69 Computer-aided detection may prove helpful in reducing variability among radiologists of differing expertise. Such programs are used by a small but growing number of mammography facilities in the United States.69,74 Medicare and Medicaid allow for additional billing for computer-aided interpretations of mammograms. As technologies continue to improve, larger multisite studies will be needed for more definitive evidence.

Clinical Breast Examination
Although two thirds of US women older than 40 years receive regular screening clinical breast examinations,2 few data about the efficacy of clinical breast examinations alone are available from randomized clinical trials. Four randomized trials of mammography included the clinical breast examination in the screened group.15,21-23 One of these trials, the Canadian National Breast Screening Study 2 of women aged 50 through 59 years at entry, compared the results of an annual standardized 10- to 15-minute clinical breast examination and breast self-examination with the results of an annual standardized clinical examination and breast self-examination plus mammography (in other words, there was no typical control group that received no screening).21 The trial found that breast cancer mortality was similar in the 2 groups of women although yearly mammography in addition to physical examination and breast self-examination detected more small and lymph node–negative breast cancers than did screening with physical examination alone.21 Although the sensitivity of screening clinical breast examination was highest at 63% in the National Breast Screening Study 2,75 an overall estimate based on all randomized trials calculated sensitivity at 54% (95% confidence interval [CI], 48%-60%) and specificity at 94% (95% CI, 90%-97%).76

We suspect that few clinicians in the community setting perform examinations as carefully as those in the Canadian trial, so accuracy may be lower in the community setting. Results reported from community practices showed sensitivity ranging from 28% to 36%77-79 (Table 3). In one study, two fifths of physicians (34 out of 80) who performed a screening breast examination on manufactured breast models used no discernible systematic search pattern at all.80 Sensitivity of examinations improved by spending more time80,81 and by using a thorough, systematic technique.76,82 However, the number of false-positive examinations may increase with training.81

In randomized controlled trials, noting an abnormality on a screening clinical breast examination in an asymptomatic average-risk woman increased the likelihood of breast cancer (likelihood ratio [LR], 10.6; 95% CI, 5.8-19.2).76 However, in community practice, an abnormal screening breast examination result was associated with an LR of 2.1,76 substantially lower than that of women in the same practice presenting with a breast abnormality (LR, 24).83 Noting a suspicious abnormality on a screening mammogram was associated with LRs ranging from 7 to 2200 (Table 1).84

Breast Self-examination
Breast self-examination is appealing as a patient-centered, noninvasive procedure that allows women to become comfortable with their own bodies. However, the extent of current practice is thought to be low.4 About one third of US women regularly perform breast self-examination, and the estimated sensitivity is low (20% to 30%).85 Among respondents to the Women Physicians’ Health Study (N = 4501), only 21% reported performing monthly breast self-examination.86

Training in breast self-examination, while associated with increased accuracy of detection of lumps in breast tissue, has been associated with increased rates of false-positive findings and thus diminished specificity.87-90 In addition, there is evidence casting doubt on the benefits. A large randomized controlled trial in Shanghai, China, of 266 064 women working in textile factories provided half of the women with intensive initial instruction, including practice with breast models, as well as regular reminders and practice examinations under supervision once every 6 months for 5 years. This study found no positive effect of breast self-examination on breast cancer mortality after 10 years of follow-up but almost double the rate of biopsies due to false-positive findings (1.8% of women in the instruction group vs 1.0% of women in the control group).88,89 The study results should be interpreted with caution because approximately 40% of women in the trial were in their 30s. Also, it is possible that a 10-year follow-up was not long enough to see an effect on breast cancer mortality.

A meta-analysis of the effect of regular breast self-examination on breast cancer mortality or rates of advanced breast cancer (a marker of death) was performed on 20 observational studies and 3 clinical trials.90 Bias and confounding may affect the results of studies of women with breast cancer who reported practicing self-examination before diagnosis. No difference in death rate was noted in studies of women who detected their cancers during self-examination (pooled relative risk [RR], 0.90; 95% CI, 0.72-1.12), and no mortality differences were noted in trials of training (pooled RR, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.92-1.12).

Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Although screen-film mammography and full-field digital mammography are the only imaging tools explicitly approved or grandfathered in for breast cancer screening by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), other modalities are under study.73 Those approved by the FDA for diagnostic purposes (not screening) include MRI, ultrasound, scintimammography, thermography, and electrical impedance imaging. Although mammography uses x-ray and sonography uses sound waves to create images, MRI produces images from the combination of a strong magnetic field, radio waves, and computer processing (Figure 2).

Screening MRI may be helpful for women for whom mammography is not optimal, such as young women at substantially increased risk for breast cancer because of known BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. Available data are limited to studies of test characteristics in women at high risk (Table 4),91-98 and the impact on breast cancer mortality has not been determined. Both retrospective and prospective cohorts have been described. The small number of cases with breast cancer in these studies (the range among studies was 3 to 45 women) means that estimates of sensitivity were not precise. Nevertheless, every study reported higher sensitivity for breast MRI than for mammography, ultrasound, or both.91-98 The largest study reported on 1909 women at increased risk in the Netherlands, with 45 women diagnosed with cancer who had all screening examinations.96 The sensitivity of clinical breast examination, mammography, and MRI in this study was 17.9%, 40%, and 71%, respectively. The overall discriminating capacity of MRI was significantly better compared with mammography as assessed by receiver operating characteristic curves (area under the curve 0.827 for MRI vs 0.686 for mammography).

Specificity of MRI tends to be lower than that of mammography; however, data are not consistently presented and specificity is not always easy to calculate. In the study of 1909 women in the Netherlands, the specificity of clinical breast examination, mammography, and MRI was 98.1%, 95.0%, and 89.8%, respectively,96 and the authors noted that screening with MRI led to twice as many unneeded additional examinations (420 vs 207) and 3 times as many unneeded biopsies (24 vs 7) as did screening with mammography.96 Warner et al98 reported a substantial recall rate in the first round of MRI screening (26%), which decreased to 10% in the third round of MRI screening. Additional studies of MRI screening among high-risk women are under way.99

Magnetic resonance imaging has not been studied in the general population as a screening tool, and the results from MRI screening of high-risk women may not apply to women at average risk. The high cost of MRI (approximately 10 times the cost of mammography) and its relatively low specificity (compared with mammography) probably prohibit its routine use for screening general populations. Also, MRI is time-consuming, requires intravenous contrast administration, and may be problematic for claustrophobic patients.

Ultrasound
Ultrasound, frequently used as a targeted diagnostic examination focusing on a specific area of concern,100 may help distinguish between cyst and solid masses and also between benign and malignant masses.101 Breast ultrasound data are available from diagnostic populations, with screening studies limited to women with dense breasts on mammography or at increased risk for breast cancer.102 Although ultrasound may detect 3 to 4 additional breast cancers per 1000 women in these increased-risk populations,93,100,101,103-108 there are no data on the use of screening ultrasound in the general population. Breast ultrasound has limitations as a potential screening tool because it requires a well-trained skilled operator. Examination techniques are not standardized, interpretation criteria are variable, and breast ultrasound does not consistently detect microcalcifications. Preliminary data suggest a higher rate of false-positive examination results with ultrasound than with mammography alone.100,104-106 For example, the false-positive rate (based on solid lesion for ultrasound) ranged from 2.4% to 12.9% for ultrasound and 0.7% to 6% for mammography.102

National Screening Guidelines
All groups recommend screening mammography for women aged 50 through 69 years.7 Within the United States, all recommend it for women in their 40s, but vary in the screening intervals recommended and encourage “informed decision making” with all women about the choice. Being older than 70 years should not preclude women from continuing to undergo screening; however, decisions regarding continued screening should include life expectancy and health status.7,41 International policies differ with respect to the target age group to be screened, the intervals between screening, the number of mammographic views taken per breast, and the screening modalities recommended.4 Clinical breast examination is recommended by some,109 but not all, groups. Most national groups no longer recommend breast self-examination, but some encourage women to become familiar with the contour of their own breasts.42,109 Other imaging modalities, such as MRI and ultrasound, are not recommended for screening the general population. (See http://www.Guidelines.gov.)

Benefits and Harms
The primary goal of breast cancer screening is to reduce subsequent breast cancer mortality through early detection. Theoretically this should translate into reduced morbidity from the disease.110 In addition, many women report feeling reassured by screening,111 especially after having a so-called normal screen result.112

Possible harms include pain and discomfort, especially noted during compression of breast tissue during mammography. Compression of breast tissue reduces motion artifact and improves image quality. Reports of the level of discomfort, however, vary widely.113-115 Anxiety about screening is another concern.116,117Breast cancer screening yields both false-positive and false-negative results. False-positive results have been associated with anxiety, additional costs, and morbidity.117,118 After 10 years of annual screening in the United States, it is estimated that 1 in 2 women will have at least 1 false-positive mammogram result, and 1 in 5 women will have at least 1 false-positive clinical breast examination result.118 False-negative mammography examinations occur in approximately 20% to 40% of women with breast cancer.36

Overdiagnosis and overtreatment of clinically insignificant disease is possible, especially ductal carcinoma in situ noted by mammography.119,120 Theoretical concerns about radiation-induced breast cancer from exposure to repeated mammography have been raised, but the potential benefits are thought to outweigh the risks. For example, the benefit-to-harm ratio is estimated to be 48.5 lives saved per 1 life lost due to radiation exposure.121 A mortality paradox has been noted in women aged 40 through 49 years, whereby increased mortality is noted among women screened for the first 3 to 10 years after the initiation of screening.122-124 Tumor dissemination after needle biopsy has also been suggested although the clinical significance is unclear.125

Observer variability among radiologists who interpret mammography examinations has been noted both in a test situation and in community practices.55-57,126 A decision to perform a breast biopsy may depend heavily on the radiologist’s interpretation; therefore, interpretive variability can directly affect patient management.126

The benefit-to-harm ratio of screening increases as women age because screening accuracy improves and prevalence of breast cancer increases. Younger women, however, have more potential years of life to be gained from screening.

Communicating With Patients
Effective communication of information on benefits and harms is challenging. Multiple studies document inaccurate or incomplete comprehension of risk information, cognitive biases that affect how patients process risk information, and poor communication skills on the part of physicians.127-130 Use of frequencies with specific reference groups (“23 out of 1000 women your age”) instead of percentages (“0.23%”) may facilitate the comparison of small risks.131-133 Presentation of both positive (“23 in 1000 women your age will develop breast cancer”) and negative framing (“977 in 1000 women your age will not develop breast cancer”) can reduce biases in decision making.130,132 Visual aids, such as bar graphs or pie charts, can increase the comprehension and saliency of information.134 Risk-prediction models can be used to calculate the probability of being diagnosed with breast cancer (Box). Effective physician-patient partnership, for which gaps in comprehension are frequently assessed and resolved may have the greatest impact on patients’ understanding of information.Conclusion
Reviews of breast cancer screening usually concentrate on the results of randomized trials of mammography to reduce breast cancer mortality. We have emphasized data on effectiveness in the community setting among the general population of women, which can often be different from the ideal setting of a randomized trial or the setting of a study among high-risk women. We have also emphasized the challenge of evaluating new screening modalities. Newer screening tests such as MRI and ultrasound have been studied in women at increased risk of breast cancer (eg, carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations). None of the newer tests has been evaluated for its effect on breast cancer mortality in the general population and no data support screening the general population with these technologies. Careful evaluation of newer modalities in the populations for which they will be used is critical, especially since these modalities are usually more expensive than current approaches and the risk of increased false-positives is present. An overview of breast cancer screening modalities is shown in Table 5.

Most national groups recommend screening with mammography, with or without clinical breast examination, beginning at 40 years of age. Data on clinical breast examination as performed in the community suggest a lower level of cancer detection than would be anticipated from trials. Breast self-examination is no longer recommended by most expert groups. Limitations and potential harms have been identified for all existing screening tools. Quality control needs to be emphasized for established.
Epidemiology and incidence statistics
Lung cancer is the most common form of cancer in the world (12.3% of all cancers), with an estimated 1.2 million new cases in 2000 (Parkin et al., 2001). Tobacco smoking is the most important cause of lung cancers with 80%–90% arising in cigarette smokers (Figure 1). There are major geographic, racial, and gender differences in incidence and some reports suggest that women may be at increased risk of lung cancer from exposure to tobacco smoke carcinogens. A lifetime smoker has a 20- to 30-fold increased risk of developing lung cancer compared to a lifetime nonsmoker. While smoking prevalence is decreasing in the USA, in China and Eastern Europe, there is an epidemic of smoking which will result in tens of millions of new cases in this century (Parkin et al., 2001, Peto et al., 1999, Peto et al., 2000). Thus, lung cancer is the most preventable of all cancers, and smoking cessation results in decreased risk after a lag period of ,7 years (Peto et al., 1999). However, this decreased risk never reaches baseline levels, and lung cancer in the USA is becoming a disease of former smokers. Despite improvements in therapy, 90% of lung cancer patients will die from their disease. In 2000, it is estimated that lung cancer resulted in 1.1 million deaths worldwide, or 17.8% of all cancer deaths. However, only, 11% of heavy cigarette smokers ultimately develop lung cancer, suggesting that there may be genetic factors predisposing to lung cancer risk.Genetic epidemiology
Segregation studies indicate a 2.5-fold risk of lung cancer from family history after controlling for cigarette smoking, suggesting the presence of a rare autosomal dominant gene predisposing to lung cancer (Amos et al., 1999). The familial association is most readily detected in lung cancer occurring in nonsmokers. However, the majority of inherited lung cancer risk probably comes from small but significant effects arising from genetic polymorphisms that are frequent in the population (Amos et al., 1999). Tobacco smoke contains over 20 known lung cancer-specific carcinogens, especially the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and the tobacco-specific nitrosamine 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK). Polymorphisms that reduce the activity of the glutathione-S transferase family, which inactivates the carcinogens, or that increase the activity of the P450 family, which activates them, may result in increased cancer susceptibility. The activated carcinogens bind to DNA, forming adducts, leading to mutations, especially G-to-T transversions, which may be repaired, lead to apoptosis, or persist. Molecular epidemiology has shown differences in smoking-related risk based on the interactions between tobacco carcinogens, genetic polymorphisms involved in activating and detoxifying these carcinogens, and host cell efficiency in monitoring and repairing tobacco carcinogen-DNA damage (Fong et al., 2001).
Conventional diagnostics and therapeutics
The majority of lung cancer cases are diagnosed when a symptom appears related to the primary, metastatic disease, or paraneoplastic syndrome (Minna, 2000). The evaluation of the lung cancer patient involves obtaining material for a histologic diagnosis, determining the stage of the disease based on the International TNM staging system using standard physical examination, computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest and abdomen, pulmonary function tests, routine laboratory tests, and weight loss of the patient. Often a flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy is performed to directly look at the large airways and obtain biopsy material, and a CT guided fine needle biopsy is often performed.
Four major histologic types comprise the majority of lung cancers, and include small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and the three non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) types. Squamous and SCLC arise mainly from the central airways, while adenocarcinomas (including bronchioloalveolar cancer) are peripherally located. Large cell lung cancer represents less differentiated forms of the other NSCLC types. There is no squamous epithelium in the normal lung, and these tumors arise from metaplastic changes resulting from smoking. SCLCs have neuroendocrine features and arise from cells programmed to differentiate along these lines. Adenocarcinomas arise from the progenitor cells of the bronchioles (Clara cells) or alveoli (Type II pneumocytes) or from mucin producing cells. Adenocarcinoma is the most common form of lung cancer in the world today, and its frequency is increasing rapidly. It is by far the commonest form in women, never smokers and in young people.
Patients with SCLC with disease confined to the chest (“limited stage”) receive concurrent chest radiotherapy and chemotherapy that often includes cisplatin and etoposide while those with more “extensive stage” disease receive chemotherapy alone with drug combinations such as cisplatin, etoposide, irinotecan, topotecan, or paclitaxel. These treatments lead to long-term survival and potential cure in 10%–25% of limited stage patients and a few extensive stage patients, while nearly all of patients have their tumors shrink with therapy, gain symptom relieve, and an increase in median survival of 10–16 months (Minna, 2000).
NSCLC patients with disease confined to the chest are further staged by surgical evaluation of the mediastinum for lymph node involvement (and more recently by positron emission tomography “PET” scans). Those patients without evidence of mediastinal lymph node involvement or distant metastatic disease have a surgical resection of the primary tumor (involving a lobe of the lung or the entire lung). For those patients with mediastinal lymph node involvement either preoperative chemotherapy (“neoadjuvant chemotherapy”) followed by an attempt at surgical resection or a combination of chemotherapy and chest radiotherapy is given in a curative approach. Alternatively, high dose radiotherapy to the chest is given with curative intent. Depending on the stage of the disease, surgical based approaches result in long-term disease free survival and potential cure of, 30%–50% of resected patients. Unfortunately, the majority of patients end up having distant metastatic disease. Currently available chemotherapy agents for the treatment of NSCLC include doublet combinations of cisplatin or carboplatin, and etoposide, gemcitabine, paclitaxel, docetaxel, vinorelbine, and irinotecan (Bunn, 2001). These combinations produce 1-year survival rates of about 35% and 2-year survival rates of about 15% (Bunn, 2001). While these therapies are not curative they often result in symptom relief and prolongation of life in the order of 2–10 months. Any patient not controlled by chemotherapy is a candidate for local radiation therapy to relieve symptoms.
Key genes and pathways involved in the pathogenesis of lung cancer
Oncogenes that contribute to the pathogenesis of lung cancer include c-myc, mutated K-ras (15%–20% of NSCLC, predominantly adenocarcinomas but never in SCLC) and overexpressed EGFR, cyclin D1, and BCL2 (Fong et al., 2001). Telomerase RNA (hTR) and the catalytic component (hTERT) are expressed in nearly all lung cancers providing a mechanism for cellular immortality. Tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) frequently involved include p53 (∼90% of SCLC; 50% NSCLC), Rb (∼90% SCLC; ∼20% NSCLC), and p16 (>50% NSCLC; <1% SCLC). Abnormalities in the function of FHIT, RASFF1A, and SEMA3B are implicated in the pathogenesis of a number of lung cancers (Zochbauer-Muller et al., 2002), irrespective of their controversial label as TSGs. Other TSGs that are less frequently involved but whose occasional inactivation points to involvement of their associated cell regulatory pathways include PTEN, hOGG1 (DNA repair), BAP1 (ubiquination). The major mode of inactivation of expression of many genes (APC, CDH13, RARβ, FHIT, RASSF1A, TIMP3, p16, MGMT, SEMA3B, DAPK) involves tumor-acquired promoter hypermethylation (Belinsky et al., 1998, Zochbauer-Muller et al., 2001). The methylated sequences can be detected in tumors, smoking damaged normal lung (preneoplastic changes), sputum, and blood (Zochbauer-Muller et al., 2001). These represent attractive surrogate biomarkers for early detection and monitoring chemoprevention, smoking cessation and response to therapy. Mitochondrial DNA, especially the displacement (D) loop, also undergoes mutations, in lung cancer, but the functional significance of this is unknown. The cell regulatory pathways that are deregulated in lung cancer include the Rb/p16/cyclin D1, p53/MDM2/p19ARF, wnt/APC, EGFR/Ras, PP2a, and telomerase pathways, as well as several genes involved in various DNA repair pathways. In addition, there is evidence of deregulation of apoptosis, angiogenesis, autocrine/paracrine growth factor circuits. The methylation changes (epigenetic alterations) and genome wide allelotyping changes showing allele loss (genetic alterations) are starting to provide speculative estimates for the minimal number of events (20–30) leading to the development of clinically evident lung cancer (Zochbauer-Muller et al., 2001, Girard et al., 2000). Many of the changes are common between NSCLC and SCLC while others have a predominance for one or the other.
 Molecular abnormalities in smoking-damaged lung as preneoplastic lesions
Lung cancers arise after a series of molecular and morphological events. The molecular events commence in histologically normal epithelium and show a specific sequence (Hirsch et al., 2001). Precise microscopic based microdissection of epithelial tissue followed by allelotyping of smoking damaged lung from lung cancer patients or current or former smokers without lung cancer revealed hundreds of thousands of lesions (90,000 cells in size) containing clonal abnormalities of allele loss (“a field defect”), occurring in both histologically normal as well as abnormal (e.g., hyperplasia, dysplasia, or carcinoma in situ; Figure 2) respiratory epithelium (Park et al., 1999). While these changes are found in the lungs of current and former smokers without lung cancer they are almost never found in life time never smokers (Wistuba et al., 1997). These clonal changes persist for decades after smoking cessation (Wistuba et al., 1997). There is a preferred order of these allele loss changes with 3p allele loss (several 3p sites) followed by 9p (p16 locus) as the earliest changes occurring in histologically normal epithelium (Wistuba et al., 1997, Wistuba et al., 1999, Wistuba et al., 2000). Similar evidence exists for multiple promoter methylation changes in smoking damaged lung and sputum (Zochbauer-Muller et al., 2001). Considerable attention has been given to the identification of the 3p genes involved in lung cancer pathogenesis including RARβ at 3p24, FHIT at 3p14.2, RASSF1A, FUS1, and SEMA3B located together at 3p21.3, and potentially ROBO1 at 3p12 (Wistuba et al., 2000, Dammann et al., 2000, Burbee et al., 2001, Tomizawa et al., 2001, Zochbauer-Muller et al., 2002). Their expression is frequently lost in lung cancer, usually by promoter methylation.Recent advances in diagnosis, treatment, and prevention
 Spiral computed tomography scans for early detection of lung cancer
CT (computed tomography) scans have been routinely used in the staging of lung cancer patients. Recently there has been intense interest generated in using low dose spiral (also called helical) computed tomography scans to screen asymptomatic patients with a history of cigarette smoking for the early detection of lung cancer (Henschke et al., 1999). The spiral CT screening trials conducted primarily in the USA and Japan have not yet been evaluated in randomized clinical trials but detected, 30 lung cancers per 1000 patients undergoing an initial screen. Nearly 85% of these tumors were very early stage NSCLCs (usually adenocarcinomas) (stage I) and presumably will have a very high rate of cure by surgery alone. Debate has ensued over whether these cancers represent “over-diagnosis”; that is tumors that would never grow to kill the patient, and thus whether prospective randomized trials should be conducted. Autofluorescence bronchoscopy, when used as an adjunct to standard white light bronchoscopy, enhances the bronchoscopist's ability to localize small preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions.
ET (positron emission tomography) scans for improved staging of lung cancer
A major advance in lung cancer staging has been the introduction of 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) (Pieterman et al., 2000). FDG PET imaging uses the increased accumulation of FDG in tumor cells compared to normal cells to identify malignant lesions and is, 95% sensitive and, 85% specific. PET is useful for detection of both mediastinal and distant metastatic disease and whole body PET scans frequently detect unsuspected distant metastatic disease or show other lesions to be benign resulting in clinical management changes in up to 40% of patients. PET is also used in evaluating solitary pulmonary nodules and can document responses to chemotherapy in a matter of days.
 Molecularly targeted therapies
New systemic therapies directed against rational targets have entered clinical trials for the treatment of lung and other cancers (Gibbs, 2000). They include angiogenesis inhibitors, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors, HER2/neu receptor inhibitors and other tyrosine kinase inhibitors, inhibitors of Ras activation and function (such as farnesyltransferase inhibitors), matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors, cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors, inhibitors of autocrine and paracrine growth factor loops, anti-sense molecules such as those directed against BCL2 or PKCα, vaccines against tumor mutated or specifically expressed peptides, and gene replacement therapy. While currently available chemotherapy has beneficial effects, often this is small. Recently, this rationally targeted approach has been greatly stimulated by the clinical success of BCR/Abl and c-kit inhibitors in chronic myelogenous leukemia and gastrointestinal stromal tumors.
 Prevention of lung cancer
The primary prevention of lung cancer through the prevention of smoking initiation (particularly in children and young adults) and helping people to stop smoking remains the long term key to lung cancer control. There have been significant decreases in smoking in certain segments of the population (such as in adult white males) that have had effects in leveling off the increase in lung cancer incidence. Whether there are gender differences in response to tobacco carcinogens, in development of nicotine addiction, or in expression of autocrine growth factor receptors such as for gastrin releasing peptide is an important new area of research. Trial proven aids for smoking cessation include the involvement of physicians in patient counseling, psychological support, nicotine replacement therapy, and the use of antidepressants (Fiore et al., 1997). Persons may also have inherited differences in their susceptibility to nicotine and thus smoking addiction.
Treatment of current and former smokers with agents thought to block the progression of lung cancer pathogenesis (chemoprevention) has been fraught with difficulty. There have been definitive, randomized, controlled lung-cancer chemoprevention trials all of which produced negative (either neutral or harmful) primary end point results (Lippman and Spitz, 2001). Recently vitamin E and selenium were found to show promise for lung cancer prevention, and there is interest in testing Cox-2 inhibition or the use of EGFR and farnysltransferase inhibitors.
Future challenges
The major challenges are: to develop social, cultural, and economic approaches to deal with the tobacco epidemic; develop new methods to prevent smoking initiation and to aid in smoking cessation including understanding the genetic basis of nicotine addiction; to develop new imaging, molecular genetic, and genetic epidemiological methods for early detection and the chemoprevention in lung cancer particularly in those individuals who have altered their life styles by stopping cigarette smoking; to be able to delineate all the significant molecular abnormalities present in any one patient's tumor and to use this information for early molecular detection, prediction of biological/clinical behavior and prognosis, and selection or rational development of therapeutics.
One Hundred Years of Lung Cancer.
A hundred years ago, lung cancer was a reportable disease, and it is now the commonest cause of death from cancer in both men and women in the developed world, and before long, will reach that level in the developing world as well. The disease has no particular symptoms or signs for its detection at an early stage. Most patients therefore present with advanced stage IIIB or IV disease. Screening tests began in the 1950s with annual chest x-ray films and sputum cytology but they resulted in no improvement in overall mortality compared with control subjects. The same question is now being asked of spiral low-dose computed tomographic scanning. There have been big refinements in the staging classification of lung cancer and advances in stage identification using minimally invasive technology. Postsurgical mortality has declined from the early days of the 1950s but 5-year cure rates have only barely improved. The addition of chemotherapy to radical radiotherapy, together with novel radiotherapy techniques, is gradually improving the outcome for locally advanced, inoperable non–small cell lung cancer. Chemotherapy offers modest survival improvement for patients with non–small cell lung cancer, the modern agents being better tolerated resulting in an improved quality of life. The management of small cell lung cancer, which appeared so promising at the beginning of the 1970s, has hit a plateau with very little advance in outcome over the last 15 years. The most important and cost-effective management for lung cancer is smoking cessation, but for those with the disease, novel agents and treatment approaches are urgently needed.ne hundred years ago, lung cancer was a reportable condition and now it accounts for more deaths worldwide from cancer than any other malignant disease. In 1912, Adler published a book entitled Primary Malignant Growths of the Lungs and Bronchi, where he reported all cases of lung cancer in the published literature worldwide. He could verify only 374 cases (1). Smoking was popularized during the First World War, when General John J. “Black Jack” Pershing reportedly stated, “you ask me what it is we need to win this war. I answer tobacco as much as bullets” (2). Still, esteemed surgeon Alton Ochsner recalled that as a student at Washington University in 1910, he was asked to witness an autopsy of a patient with lung cancer, having been told lung cancer was so rare that he may never see another case. It was 17 years before he saw his next case at Charity Hospital in New Orleans. Within the next 6 months eight more cases were seen at that hospital (all in men who smoked heavily) and this began what he called an epidemic (3). Today, in the United States, the combined annual number of deaths from breast, colon, and prostate cancer would not equal the death toll from lung cancer, and last year more than 150,000 patients died of this disease. It represents the most preventable respiratory disease worldwide and, while its incidence is decreasing in the developed world, an epidemic of untold proportions is unfolding in the developing countries. Advances in imaging, diagnosis, staging, and treatment have come relatively recently, but despite our best efforts, the 5-year survival for this disease remains a dismal 16% in the United States and 5% in the United Kingdom. This short review hopes to highlight areas and times of progress with this disease.There have been several historic breakthroughs over the century but none more important than Sir Richard Doll and Austin Hill's landmark article, published in 1950 in the British Medical Journal, which confirmed suspicions that lung cancer was associated with cigarette smoking (4). (The smoking history enquiry was added only because the final page was half empty!) The importance of this article cannot be underestimated as smoking rates were at their peak in the United States and Europe after the Second World War, physicians could be seen advocating smoking in tobacco advertisements, and the claims by the tobacco industry that smoking was safe went completely unchallenged. The second landmark publication was the U.S. Surgeon General's report in 1964, in which he stated that smoking was harmful to health and efforts should be made not to take up the habit or to quit (5). Smoking rates have declined since that report, with a proportional decrease in lung cancer rates lagging some 20 years behind. While lung cancer rates were less than 5 per 100,000 at the start of the 20th century in the United States (6, 7), by 1998, the age-adjusted death rate per 100,000 population for men had reached 77.2 in Belgium and 75.5 in Scotland, with the 10 highest rates all in European countries. The 10 lowest rates for men were found primarily in South America and Asia.

The most disturbing trend is the burgeoning epidemic in countries of the developing world. In 1985, it was estimated that there were 921,000 lung cancer deaths worldwide—an increase of 17% from just 1980 (8). The International Agency for Research on Cancer in France found that the rate of lung cancer in Africa in 1994 was similar to that of the United States in the 1930s, at about 5 per 100,000 (6, 9). By 1999, the rate of lung cancer in men in the developing countries was 14.1 per 100,000 and on the rise as compared with the rate of 71.4 per 100,000 in the developed countries and on the decline. For women, the lung cancer rate is 5.1 per 100,000 in developing countries versus 21.2 per 100,000 in developed countries (10). The figures in developing countries will underestimate the true rates of lung cancer as many go undiagnosed or unreported in areas where health care is not readily available (8, 11). One exception to this lack of data is China, where some large studies have been performed to investigate lung cancer (8). Liu and coworkers estimated that nearly 800,000 Chinese men would die of lung cancer in 1998 (8). Others have predicted that China, where one-third of the world's smokers reside, will have millions of lung cancer deaths annually by the middle of the 21st century (12). The average number of cigarettes smoked by every adult male in China is 11/day, with 67% of the male population smoking, equivalent to the highest rates ever seen in the United States. The consumption of cigarettes in China may surpass that of all of the developed countries combined (8, 13). Needless to say, while educational efforts continue to pay dividends in the developed world, organizations such as the World Health Organization and all the respiratory societies have an obligation to educate those in developing nations about the detrimental effects of tobacco abuse in the same way that efforts at the eradication of tuberculosis have occurred. For the sake of completeness, one should mention the other causes or associations with the development of lung cancer, which include radon, second-hand smoke, and asbestos exposure, among others.There have been two major efforts to screen for lung cancer over the last century: the first was based on chest radiographs in the 1970s and 1980s and the second has used low-dose computed tomography (CT), and is ongoing today. The results of randomized trials using the chest radiograph failed to show a reduction in lung cancer mortality in the screened group (14–16). These studies have been criticized for being underpowered and having high contamination rates in the control groups. Because of the deficiencies in these trials, a large trial sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) trial, has been underway for about 10 years. The lung arm randomized persons to screening with chest radiograph versus no screen in smokers. It is powered to detect a 10% reduction in mortality due to lung cancer but the final results will not be available for several years.

A resurgence in interest for screening occurred at the turn of this century with the understanding that CT is much more sensitive for detecting pulmonary nodules than the standard chest radiograph. There have been several uncontrolled trials using low-dose spiral CT (16–22). These have shown that spiral CT detects more lung cancers than does chest radiograph, but also a high prevalence of noncalcified nodules. The low-dose CT trials have shown a stage shift, with a higher proportion of cancers than expected detected at an earlier, presumably more curable, stage. However, it is not possible to determine whether this is due to lead time, length time, or overdiagnosis bias. Furthermore, it is unclear whether the evaluation of patients with noncalcified nodules will lead to an unacceptably high rate of morbidity or mortality in the screened group without cancer. Thus, a randomized controlled trial is needed, with the primary end point being a reduction in mortality from non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The National Lung Cancer Screening Trial will randomize 50,000 high-risk participants to screening with CT or chest radiograph. Subjects will be screened yearly for 3 years and followed up for another 5 years. The trial completed accrual in 2004, but final results may not be available for at least 5 years.The staging of lung cancer has undergone significant evolution over the last century. Today, appropriate staging is critical as the treatment options and prognosis are vastly different for each stage. The most significant dividing line is between those patients who are candidates for surgical resection and those who are inoperable, but will benefit from chemotherapy or radiation therapy or both. The basis for staging NSCLC is the TNM (tumor, nodal involvement, distant metastasis) system (23, 24). The majority of lung cancers are initially detected by plain chest radiograph. Up until the 1970s, chest radiograph was the only tool available for staging lung cancer. Unfortunately, plain radiograph is both insensitive and nonspecific in diagnosing the extent of disease within the chest.

CT of the chest was introduced in the late 1970s. Numerous evaluations of CT were performed that compared clinical staging by CT with the “gold standard” of mediastinoscopy or surgery. These studies demonstrated that regardless of threshold size, CT findings in isolation could not be considered conclusive evidence that lymph nodes were malignant. In other words, in all studies there is an unacceptably high rate of “false positives” detected by CT scan (25, 26). Still, CT remains the most widely used imaging test to stage patients with lung cancer. The test is useful in defining the extent of the tumor; whether there is involvement of vascular structures, mediastinum, or chest wall; and to assess the size of the mediastinal lymph nodes. Unfortunately, about 40% of all nodes deemed malignant by CT criteria are actually benign depending on the patient population, and specificity can be affected by clinical factors such as the presence of postobstructive pneumonitis (27).

Another modality for staging lung cancer is positron emission tomography (PET), which is based on the biologic activity of neoplastic cells. Lung cancer cells demonstrate increased cellular uptake of glucose and a higher rate of glycolysis when compared with normal cells (28). The radiolabeled glucose analog 2-[18F]fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG) accumulates in cells that have high glucose utilization and can then be identified with a PET camera. A number of studies have reported on the utility of CT and FDG-PET scanning in the assessment of patients with lung cancer (25, 26). Pooled data evaluating the accuracy of CT scanning for staging the mediastinum were identified, combining 4,793 evaluable patients. The pooled sensitivity of CT scanning for staging the mediastinum was 0.60 (95% confidence interval [95% CI], 0.51–0.68) and the pooled specificity was 0.81 (95% CI, 0.74–0.86). The pooled sensitivity of PET was 0.85 (95% CI, 0.79–0.89) and the pooled specificity was 0.88 (95% CI, 0.82–0.92). Thus, it appears that PET has both higher sensitivity and specificity for evaluation of mediastinal lymph nodes than does CT scanning (25).

One randomized trial revealed that futile thoracotomies could be avoided in about 20% of patients previously believed to be resectable (29). Although PET has a much higher overall accuracy than CT for detecting both intra- and extrathoracic disease, both false positives and negatives are reported. Thus, tissue confirmation of abnormal findings discovered on either modality is the rule in most cases. Improvements in technology have increased our use of bronchoscopy with transbronchial needle aspirate, endoscopic ultrasonography, mediastinoscopy, thoracoscopy, and transthoracic needle biopsy to allow for minimally invasive tissue procurement and more accurate staging (30). Although these minimally invasive techniques have now become commonplace, mediastinoscopy remains the gold standard for tissue procurement, with its extremely high sensitivity and specificity coupled with low morbidity.The principles of treatment have changed little over the last 50 years, and remain surgery, radiotherapy or chemotherapy, or a combination of one or all of these. In the first half of the 20th century, there was no effective treatment for lung cancer. During the last 50 years, surgery has become safer, and remains the principal modality to offer a chance for cure, and techniques, including preoperative staging, have become considerably refined. The administration of radiotherapy has also become more sophisticated, with higher dose treatments increasingly feasible, better field planning, and more focused targeting. Chemotherapy has also improved, with virtually none of the agents used in the 1950s–1970s being given today and with appreciation of optimal scheduling, duration of therapy, and attention to side effects and quality of life. Despite this, the 1- and 5-year survival figures for all patients with the disease have changed little over the last 30 years Targeted therapy with specific tumor antagonists is a potential future treatment. Also, overall care and decision making for patients diagnosed with lung cancer are increasingly being made in a multidisciplinary team environment with thoracic physicians, surgeons, radiation and medical oncologists, radiologists, pathologists, and palliative care and lung cancer specialist nurses. This corporate ownership of decision making should, in principle, extend to every patient with newly diagnosed lung cancer The first deliberate attempt at pulmonary resection was in 1821, when an American, Milton Anthony, removed “one or two pounds of pulmonary tissue” along with two portions of ribs. The patient survived the operation only to die 1 year later. The first successful pneumonectomy for lung cancer was in 1933; the patient went on to practice medicine and it dramatically showed the world that this was a curable disease (32).

As surgery became more feasible, it became clear that the majority of patients were technically unsuitable for resection because of obvious dissemination of disease, but also that many patients, although technically operable, still represented too much risk. Most of the latter causes were due to concomitant disease, in particular heart disease, but in others the prospect of a pneumonectomy was too great for their preoperative lung function. By 1970, it was shown that adverse prognostic factors included weight loss of more than 10 pounds, physical evidence of cancer, pneumonectomy, obstruction of a bronchus, blood vessel invasion, lymphatic invasion, lobar node involvement, and hilar or mediastinal node involvement. Favorable factors included age under 60 years, operation on the right, and tumor confined to the lung (33). Surgeons were also engaging in controversy concerning whether to operate on those aged more than 70 years (nearly half of today's lung cancer population in the Western world) (34). Efforts in the 1960s and 1970s showed mortality ranging between 3 and 17% within 30 days of surgery, but already emphasis was on careful selection and lung-sparing procedures whenever possible (35–37).

The most important development in surgery was staging, which was first hinted as being of relevance in 1876 when Parrot pointed out that changes in the hilar lymph nodes frequently reflect diseases in the lungs. Daniels demonstrated in 1949 that the lymph nodes in the scalene fat pads often showed the same pathology as was suspected in the chest and that a biopsy of these nodes could be of diagnostic value. Harken and colleagues, dissatisfied at the poor yield of this method, were the first to show that exploration of the upper neck and mediastinum was feasible. However, this was at first only a unilateral approach, which was a distinct disadvantage, especially as it became apparent that with lung cancer contralateral spread in the superior mediastinum occurred not uncommonly. In 1959, Carlens devised mediastinoscopy as it is known today (38). The accessibility of some of the central thoracic structures led to the development of accurate subclassification of tumor extent and the TNM classification was applied to this disease in 1974For NSCLC, resection remains the first modality to consider. As patients are increasingly elderly, attempts to resect tumors in the elderly in particular have led to lung-conserving surgery, especially wedge resections and concomitant tumor resection as part of lung volume reduction surgery in advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Wedge resection was already being performed in the early 1970s (36, 40), often in patients who had a second cancer in the contralateral lung after initial resection. The 5-year survival rates were about 55%, although the early death rate was high among those who had undergone a previous contralateral resection. Although wedge resection does appear an attractive alternative, particularly for those with compromised lung function, both retrospective and prospective studies show a higher recurrence rate and a trend toward worse survival (41). This approach, although not the treatment of choice, still offers these high-risk patients a chance for cure.

The ready use of CT scanning will allow recognition of small tumors and this will make less invasive surgery feasible. Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery can be used for wedge resection and even lobectomy for smaller tumors, although the ability of this technique to provide formal intrathoracic nodal sampling—that is, full staging—remains controversial. However, the technique is associated with less preoperative morbidity, better pain control, and shorter in-hospital stay.

The 5-year survival for pneumonectomy remains at about 40% because of the more advanced nature of the resected disease (42). It also carries a higher perioperative mortality than lobectomy (8–10 vs. 2–4%) and is particularly difficult for elderly patients.

Efforts to improve the cure rates for those undergoing resection after modern staging include neo- and adjuvant chemotherapy, some trials also including pre- or postoperative radiotherapy. It is surprising that the results of only three randomized controlled trials of neoadjuvant chemotherapy have been published. Two were small but also significantly in favor of the neoadjuvant arm (43, 44), but a much bigger trial of 325 patients failed to confirm the advantage (45). Thus only about 450 patients have been subjected to careful randomized studies concerning this important question. The chemotherapy used in these studies was not “modern” and newer regimens are now being tested in randomized controlled trials.

There has been more success in assessing the role of adjuvant chemotherapy. It seemed to confer an approximately 5% advantage over surgery alone in a large meta-analysis of all randomized controlled trials asking this question in 1995 (46). Since then, large studies have been both positive (47) and negative (48, 49), although two recent, as yet unpublished, trials from the United States and Canada (50, 51) are strongly positive for early-stage resected cases. Patients will be asked increasingly to consider postoperative chemotherapy after a curative resection, as a further 5% survival advantage in a common disease is important. However, as yet, there is no consensus recommendation for this additional treatment. Nevertheless, this improvement in longer term survival is as good as or better than that seen with adjuvant therapy in other solid tumors.As a curative modality, radiotherapy has been disappointing. In locally advanced disease it controls tumor growth and reduces recurrence rates, but despite trials with escalating doses up to 80 Gy, it has a 5-year survival rate of 7 to 10% (52, 53). The standard radical dose in NSCLC remains at about 60 Gy, which is a compromise between an adequate dose and minimizing lung and esophageal toxicity. Novel ways of dose intensification have been explored, the most promising being hyperfractionation. The British Medical Research Council study of continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy (CHART) with fractions of 1.5 Gy administered at 8-hour intervals to a total of 54 Gy versus conventional daily treatment showed a striking advantage for CHART, especially for squamous cell tumors, with 30 versus 20% survival at 2 years (54). Despite what seemed a major advance in the administration of radiotherapy, the daily approach foundered with the impracticality of managing to continue over the weekend. Also, patients had to be “grouped” for cost reasons. CHART is now being superceded by CHARTWEL, that is, with weekend leave, which may be as effective.

The combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy has provided better median and longer term survival than radiotherapy alone. Not all studies comparing the two treatments have shown an advantage for the combined approach. The NSCLC Collaborative Group meta-analysis of 1995 found a benefit of 4% at 2 years and 2% at 5 years (46). Several subsequent studies have shown similar advantages for the combined modality (55), but it is still not clear what the sequencing of the treatments should be. There is a suggestion that concurrent chemoirradiation is superior to sequential chemotherapy followed by irradiation. The only published randomized controlled trial to date showed a 4-month median survival advantage for concurrent treatment (16 vs. 12 months) (56). The future for radiotherapy appears to be with careful field planning, using CT and three-dimensional planning to more precisely define the limits of the tumor and to allow a higher dose to be given safely in a focused manner. Finally, as radical therapy relies on the tumor being confined to the irradiated site, PET will have a significant role in pretreatment staging.

Radiotherapy has proven most successful in palliating lung cancer symptoms in up to 80% of instances, including bone pain, hemoptysis, cough, superior vena caval syndrome, and, to a lesser extent, cerebral metastases. Single fractions of 8 Gy or two fractions of 17 Gy are as effective as longer bigger treatments, making palliation feasible for outpatient visits (57, 58).

Radiotherapy was considered the treatment of choice for small cell lung cancer (SCLC) in the 1960s. The British Medical Research Council conducted a trial comparing surgery with radiotherapy with rather equivalent results, 3 and 7% survival at 4 years, respectively. In their 10-year follow-up report, they confirmed that “a patient with oat cell carcinoma on bronchoscopic biopsy should submit to radiotherapy rather than surgery” (59). Subsequent studies of the natural history of this cell type revealed its enormous propensity to be disseminated at presentation, and rendered both these modalities virtually redundant as primary treatments.

In SCLC, with the emergence of chemotherapy as a systemic treatment radiotherapy was examined as a means to enhance local control of the primary tumor site, particularly after a partial or complete response to chemotherapy. The advantage for the addition of radiotherapy after chemotherapy was confirmed in meta-analyses after several randomized controlled trials had produced mixed messages. One was based on 1,911 published cases in trials and looked at 2-year survival, local control, and toxicity (60). The other included 2,140 patients and looked at the 3-year survival and prognostic factors (61). Both showed modest improvements in survival rates in those given thoracic radiotherapy. At 3 years, 9% of patients who received chemotherapy alone and 14% of those who received combined modality treatment were alive, with a 14% reduction in the risk of death for the combined approach. Radiotherapy thus became the standard for responding patients; however, the precise timing of the radiotherapy has been the subject of further trials. These have examined giving it early (within 9 weeks of starting chemotherapy) or late, that is, at the end of chemotherapy, or with the last course of treatment. Some studies found a survival advantage for early radiotherapy (62, 63) whereas other, similar studies did not (64, 65). Although the doses and fractionation schedules varied between these studies, the message appears to be that hyperfractionated radiotherapy given early may be more effective than single daily fractionation schedules, given early or late (66). However, the most important factor would seem to be to deliver the chemotherapy at optimal intensity. Failure to deliver chemotherapy adequately, especially if given concurrently with radiotherapy, may limit any potential benefit.The natural history of advanced NSCLC is particularly poor, with a median survival of 4 to 6 months. Early trials with chemotherapy showed response rates of 10 to 15%, disappointing compared with more than 50% for SCLC. The gain over best supportive care was about 6 weeks, with a 10% improvement in survival at 1 year (46). This advantage was seen only for cisplatin-containing regimens, and the early choices of long-acting alkylating agents plus, for example, cyclophosphamide, vinblastine, or methotrexate were associated with worse results than best supportive care alone. Over the last 10 years, newer agents have emerged that have provided slightly better median and 1-year survival, 7–10 months, with 35 to 40% alive at 1 year (67, 68). However, the main advantage of modern chemotherapy with carbo- or cisplatin, plus vinorelbine, gemcitabine, or a taxane has been easier administration on an outpatient basis; fewer side effects, such as nausea, vomiting, and hair loss; and an improvement in quality of life, which had been overshadowed and lost by the side effects of the chemotherapy itself (69). The results from treatment trials in advanced NSCLC apply to a minority of patients with the disease, as trials tend to be conducted in patients with better performance status, younger individuals, and those attending interested treatment centers. Despite lung cancer being increasingly a disease of the elderly, less than 20% of patients over 70 years of age enter treatment trials. Also, trials have been limited in the main to those with good performance status (ECOG 0-1), whereas many present with performance status level 2 or 3. Much more needs to be done in future to include the elderly and to devise acceptable treatment regimens for poorer performance status patients. There is good evidence that fit, good-performance-status elderly patients respond just as well as younger individuals (70). Similarly, although poorer performance status patients are unlikely to live as long as their fitter counterparts, they do respond to chemotherapy with an improvement in quality of life for a time.

With these problems in mind, it is timely that a new approach to treatment is emerging with targeted therapy. Mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been identified in NSCLC, and overexpression of EGFR and its ligands has made it an attractive target for various antitumor strategies. Aberrant signaling from the EGFR is known to be important in the development and progression of NSCLC. Two oral inhibitors of EGFR, gefitinib and erlotinib, are small molecule agents that selectively inhibit the intracellular tyrosine kinase activity of the EGFR. Both have demonstrated antitumor activity in patients with advanced NSCLC who have relapsed after treatment with conventional chemotherapy regimens, with a low toxicity profile. Two randomized phase II studies of gefitinib have examined differences between two doses of the drug in relapsed disease (71, 72) These have shown tumor responses and improvement in symptom control. A placebo-controlled trial of erlotinib, also in relapsed, advanced NSCLC, has shown a survival advantage for the active arm, again with better quality of life (73). Although EGFR expression is common in NSCLC, responses to these agents are few, and seem particularly associated with nonsmokers, women ,and patients with bronchoalveolar cell carcinomas. Furthermore, a report has identified specific mutant versions of EGFR in NSCLC cells in biopsies of patients who respond to gefitinib (74). To date, these mutations have been found only in NSCLC and seem to be present in about 10% of biopsy samples. These mutations may identify those who will respond, but the number of responders seems to exceed the percentage of those with the mutation.

Other EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors are under investigation, including the monoclonal antibody cetuximab, which has been approved for the treatment of colorectal cancer. The antiangiogenic vascular endothelial growth factor monoclonal antibody bevacizumab has also been allowed for the treatment of colorectal cancer. Thalidomide, another antiangiogenic substance, is in clinical trials with chemotherapy in both NSCLC and SCLC.

Small cell lung cancer remains the most frustrating cancer to treat and little progress has occurred. In randomized trials in the 1970s, there was some optimism concerning SCLC treatment as several active single chemotherapy agents were discovered, and these became more active in combinations of two or three drugs. Objective responses were seen in 80 to 90% of those treated, and the median survival rose rapidly from 5 months untreated to 18 to 20 months for those with limited disease, and from a matter of weeks untreated to 6 to 9 months for those with extensive disease. The best survivals were seen in patients with good performance status, and normal values for serum sodium, alkaline phosphatase, and urea (75). Sadly, there has been little further improvement. Better tolerated chemotherapy regimens have been introduced, for example, etoposide and carboplatin. Radiotherapy to the mediastinum in responding patients adds to long-term survival, and prophylactic whole brain radiotherapy prevents the high morbidity of cerebral relapse. Many attempts to intensify chemotherapy, either initially, or late, or with bone marrow or granulocyte-macrophage colony–stimulating factor support have all failed to improve the prognosis. Patients continue to benefit from treatment because of the high rates of response and a significant improvement in quality of life for these very symptomatic sufferers. However, as with NSCLC, treatment with second-line chemotherapy at relapse has a disappointing effect with few responses and short progression-free intervals. It seems that most attention today is on the less responsive NSCLC and we have moved away from SCLC despite its much greater potential for response to therapy.

In summary, lung cancer was a virtually nonexistent disease 100 years ago. Arguably, the most significant advance in this disease has been the recognition that smoking is the causal agent. There have been major technical advances in imaging, surgical technique, and the use of chemotherapy and radiotherapy to treat this disease. Unfortunately, these advances have brought only small improvements in survival. Nonetheless, those in cancer research remain hopeful that improvements in survival will come in the decades ahead. No diagnostic or treatment modality will have nearly the effect on mortality as the elimination of tobacco products from the marketplace. As Johnston wrote, “Hippocrates never heard of it” (76). It would be nice if, at the bicentennial review of diseases of the chest, lung cancer could be relegated to a historical footnote.The epidemiology of lung cancer.Abstract
The incidence and mortality from lung cancer is decreasing in the US due to decades of public education and tobacco control policies, but are increasing elsewhere in the world related to the commencement of the tobacco epidemic in various countries and populations in the developing world. Individual cigarette smoking is by far the most common risk factor for lung carcinoma; other risks include passive smoke inhalation, residential radon, occupational exposures, infection and genetic susceptibility. The predominant disease burden currently falls on minority populations and socioeconomically disadvantaged people. In the US, the recent legalization of marijuana for recreational use in many states and the rapid growth of commercially available electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS) present challenges to public health for which little short term and no long term safety data is available.Introduction
In the last century carcinoma of the lung has progressed from an uncommon and obscure disease to the most common cancer in the world and the most common cause of death from cancer. In the late 1840s, the British author Hasse could find no more than 22 ever-published cases of lung cancer (1,2). In 1912, Adler identified only 374 published cases (3,4). In the current era, the most recent global statistical analysis estimates 1.8 million new cases were diagnosed worldwide in 2012, with 1.6 million deaths in the same year (5). This is increased from 1.6 million new diagnoses and 1.4 million lung cancer deaths in 2008 (6). Incidence trends and geographical patterns are different for men and women and primarily reflect historical, cultural and regional differences in tobacco smoking (5). In the United States, an estimated 234,030 persons, a little less than a quarter of a million, will be newly diagnosed with lung cancer in 2018 (7). The known risk factors for lung cancer include behavioral, environmental and genetic risk factors, all of which play a part in tumor development and also affect individual patients’ capacity for response. The low overall 5-year survival rate for lung cancer has changed only minimally in decades (7-9).Lung cancer statistics
Incidence
The estimated new cases of lung cancer in the US for 2018 are 121,680 for men and 112,350 for women, for a total of 234,030 (7), the equivalent of 641 lung cancers diagnosed per day. Lung carcinoma is the 2nd most common cancer diagnosis by gender, behind prostate cancer for men and breast cancer for women (7). In 2018, lung cancer accounts for 14% of new cancers in men and 13% of new cancers in women in the US (7).

Age-adjusted lung cancer incidence rates for men in the US have declined per 100,000 population since 1982 (7), reflecting changes in risk behaviors following the promulgation of information about the risks of tobacco smoking in the 1950s and 1960s and later governmental tobacco control measures. In the last few decades, the incidence rate in men has decreased at twice the decline of incidence in women, due to differences in smoking uptake and cessation (7,10). The incidence rates for US women did not plateau until the early to mid-2000s, and saw a modest decline between 2006 and 2014 (7). It should be noted that while the incidence rates for new lung cancer diagnoses per 100,000 population have trended down, the actual number of incident cases of lung cancer has increased: there were 161,000 new lung cancer cases in 1991 (3,11), compared with an estimated 234,101 new diagnoses in 2018 (7).

Mortality and survival
In the US, a hard-won decline in lung cancer deaths follows decades of tobacco control initiatives. There was a 45% decrease in male lung cancer deaths between 1990 and 2015 and lung cancer deaths in women declined 19% from 2002–2015 (7). Estimates of mortality in 2018 are 83,550 deaths for men and 70,500 for women, around 25% of annual cancer fatalities (7). Lung cancer has one of the lowest survival rates, along with liver and pancreatic cancer. The 5-year relative survival rate for all stages combined was 12% for lung cancers diagnosed from 1975–1977. It is now 18% for new cancer diagnoses between 2003 and 2009 (9,12). Lung cancer is often not diagnosed until advanced stage disease is present, even more so in black Americans compared with white Americans (7,13). Advanced lung cancer has extremely poor prognosis, with a 5-year survival of only 5% (7).

Global trends in lung cancer epidemiology
Lung cancer rates vary around the world, reflecting geographical differences in tobacco use and air quality (12). Worldwide, lung cancer incidence is increasing (5,14). Rates of lung cancer in men are considerably higher in developed countries than in less-developed ones, predominantly related to smoking habits, but overall incidence is decreasing in men from developed countries due to tobacco control policies (12,14). Lung cancer in women is also more prevalent in the developed world and linked with cigarette smoking (12). Worldwide, rates of female lung cancer are increasing (14). For instance, female lung cancer incidence in Europe has been rising for most of the 21st century and in 2017 exceeded breast cancer mortality rates for the first time, 14.6 lung cancer deaths per 100,000 compared with 14 per 100,000 for breast cancer (15). In some regions, particularly Asia, indoor air pollution and occupational exposures play a greater role in female lung cancer (12). Similar to the US, there is significant geographical and ethnic variation in lung cancer incidence and mortality within regions. Higher income countries have comparatively improved survival rates than low income countries (12). Of particular concern for the future is the recent rise of cigarette consumption in countries like China, where 65% of men initiate smoking by their mid-20s, presaging an epidemic of lung cancer in the next few decades (16).Demographic factors in US lung cancer
Lung cancer incidence and mortality in the US have racial and ethnic disparities as well as geographical differences. They are inversely proportional to the level of education attained by segments of the population. Education levels correlate with socioeconomic factors, including employment opportunities and income. As a result of this entwined set of factors, the burden of lung cancer in the 21st century is disproportionately borne by minorities and those living in poverty. Age and gender also influence patterns of disease.

Race/ethnicity
Non-Hispanic black (NHB) men have the highest incidence at 87.9 per 100,000. Non-Hispanic white (NHW) men and American Indian/Alaska native (AI/AN) have incidences of 75.9 and 71.9, respectively. These are considerably higher than 45.2 per 100,000 for Asian/Pacific Islanders (A/PI) and 40.6 for Hispanic men (7). In US women, incidence rates are highest in NHW, 57.6 per 100,000, and AI/AN, 55.9 per 100,000. Lung cancer is diagnosed in NHB women at a somewhat lower rate, 50.1, which is nevertheless almost twice that of A/PI women, 27.9, and Hispanic women, 25.2 (7).

Nevertheless, substantial variation exists within these broad categories. For instance, lung cancer incidence rates within the Asian population from 2004–2008 are significantly different for Indian and Pakistani men, 30.1 per 100,000, than for Vietnamese men at 73.4 per 100,000 (12). Hawaiian men have an incidence of lung cancer similar to NHW men, even though A/PI rates overall are lower. Within the NHB population, foreign born immigrants have a lower cancer incidence than native African Americans due to divergent smoking habits (7). Cuban Hispanic men have almost twice the lung cancer mortality of Mexican men, also related to cultural smoking trends (17).

Geography
Geographic patterns in lung cancer diagnosis are also evident, attributable to differences in the percentage of smokers in the population. The incidence of lung cancer in men in the state of Kentucky is 116.3 per 100,000, compared with 73 for the US overall and 32.7 for the lowest state, Utah. The same is true for women; the incidence rate of 79.7 per 100,000 in Kentucky is more than 3 times that in Utah, 24.1. Other states with higher incidence and mortality rates from lung cancer are Mississippi, Arkansas, West Virginia, Tennessee, Alabama and Louisiana (7). The lung cancer mortality rates for women in some Southern and Midwestern states have been reported to be unchanged or even increased despite the overall national trends (18). So far 18 states have declined to expand Medicaid, which is a joint federal and state program for low income individual and families to help with medical expenses; this is leading to reduced access to health care (19).

Education/occupation/income
Cigarette smoking is much more prevalent in individuals with less than a high school education, 32.1%, compared with 9.1% in college graduates (7). Lung cancer incidence is similarly disproportionate by education level. Incidence rates range from 166.6 per 100,000 in men who didn’t graduate from high school to 57.6 in college graduates (12). Individuals with more education are less likely to start smoking and more amendable to quitting (12). Smokers with low educations levels are less likely to even attempt to quit (12). Better educated people also have more resources with greater access to healthcare, leading to disparities in mortality and survival (7).

Smoking prevalence is 24% in the active military, and 29% of male veterans are smokers (20,21). Cigarette use in the military is linked with young Caucasian men without college education. Career enlisted individuals are more likely to be heavy smokers than officers (21). Tobacco use is highest in the Army, 37.3%, and Marine Corps, 35.7%. The Air Force has the lowest rate at 23.2% (21). The military services have been specifically targeted by tobacco company advertising (20,22).

Approximately 27.9% of people below the poverty threshold smoke (12). Although there is a strong association between lower income and cigarette smoking, some studies have shown a correlation between lower socioeconomic status and lung cancer incidence regardless of smoking status, suggesting contribution of other environmental factors including housing accommodations and occupational exposures (23,24).

Age
Older age is associated with cancer development due to biologic factors that include DNA damage over time and shortening telomeres. Accordingly, the median age of lung cancer diagnosis is 70 years for both men and women (12). Approximately 53% of cases occur in individuals 55 to 74 years old and 37% occur over 75 years old. The highest incidence of lung cancer in men is 585.9 per 100,000 in 85–89 years old, while the highest incidence in women is 365.8 per 100,000 in 75–79 years old (12). Lung cancer is the leading cause of death by any means in men over 40 years and in women over 59 years of age (7).

Nevertheless, lung cancer is seen in very young adults. Ten percent of cases occur in patients less than 55 years. Studies of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in patients 20–46 years of age have reported that young lung cancer patients are more likely to be female, to have adenocarcinoma histology, to be non-smokers, and to present at a more advanced stage of disease (25). Young patients usually have few co-morbidities and genetic factors are thought to play a large role in this patient population. Younger patients are more likely to receive more aggressive treatment at all stages of the disease and to have improved survival at every stage, although this margin is very small for advanced disease (25).

Gender
Historically more men than women smoke tobacco and have higher rates of incidence and mortality. Women took up smoking at a later period, mostly after the Second World War, and their rates of cessation have lagged behind those of men, leading to a much later peak in lung cancer incidence in women (7). Height at maturity has been reported to be linked with invasive cancer diagnosis and may be a factor in gender disparity (26).

There are conflicting data regarding the possibility that women may be more susceptible to developing lung cancer (27). There is a higher rate of lung cancer in non-smoking women compared with non-smoking men, a higher proportion of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in female NSCLC, and a higher incidence of adenocarcinoma with lepidic features in women (28,29). Some genetic mutations found to be more common in female smokers may predispose toward lung cancer development in women, including over-expression of the CYP1A1 gene, mutation of the glutathione S-transferase M1 enzyme, mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene, and over-expression of X-linked gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (27-29). Women also have a higher family risk of lung cancer, even adjusting for smoking status (30).

The question of hormonal influence is also debated. Estrogen receptor (ER)α, which is not present in normal lung tissue, has been shown to be overexpressed in lung adenocarcinoma of women, but some studies also demonstrate overexpression in cancers of men (27). One study has found that estradiol promoted growth of female but not male adenocarcinoma cells in vitro (31). Anti-estrogen compounds have been shown in vitro to have anti-tumor effects (30). Other variables studied include parity, age at menarche, length of menstrual cycle, age at menopause, and exogenous hormone replacement therapy, in some cases with conflicting results (30,32).

Overall, women have some unique risk factors for lung cancer compared with men, and lung tumors in women have different pathologic behavior, outcomes and prognosis in comparison with lung cancer in men (30).

Lung cancer incidence in transgender men and women has not yet been addressed. Transgender adults have higher prevalence of cigarette smoking than the general population, 35.5% (33,34). Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer or Questioning (LGBTQ) adolescents are reported to have equally high smoking rates as well as earlier smoking initiation (35). Questions about the role of endogenous and exogenous hormones in lung cancer in cisgender women will also need to be examined for this population group.Behavioral risk factors for lung cancer
Tobacco and smoking: historical perspective
The use of tobacco cigarettes is the single greatest risk factor in the development of lung cancer, with up to 90% of lung cancers attributed to smoking. An understanding of this causal relationship developed only slowly and gradually, not least because of the decades-long latency period between smoking initiation and lung cancer occurrence (16). Prior to the 20th century, tobacco had been used for centuries without significant disease burden (16). In the pre-Columbian Americas, tobacco was used primarily for medicinal and ritual purposes (36,37). Tobacco was brought to Europe at the end of the 15th century and utilized in various forms including snuff, pipes and cigars. Cigarettes were, until the late 19th century, expensive, hand-rolled, and not considered acceptable in polite society or around women (16,38,39).

Several technological developments in the mid to late 1800s precipitated the increased popularity and wide use of cigarettes. Flue curing of tobacco, which was introduced in the 1840s, produced a higher sugar content in dried tobacco with a smoother smoke that was easier to inhale. The safety match was invented in 1844, creating a quick and convenient method of lighting a cigarette. The automated cigarette rolling machine was invented in 1880 and the improved capacity for production led to a decline in prices and mass availability (16,40).

Cigarette smoking increased dramatically in the US and Europe during the world wars, first in men and then in women. Soldiers were given free cigarettes and developed a nicotine habit, subsequently bringing the practice back home at the end of the war (16). At that time, there was no detailed knowledge of harmful effects from tobacco smoking or understanding of nicotine addiction, and many healthcare professionals smoked. Some authors suggested a link between cigarette smoking and the increasing cases of lung cancer in the 1920s and 1930s, but these reports did not have a tangible effect on consumption (2,41-47). Major epidemiological studies published in 1950 by Doll and Hill (48) and Wynder and Graham (49) definitively established that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer; additional confirmatory studies followed. Subsequently, reports were issued by the Royal College of Physicians in Great Britain in 1962 and the US Surgeon General in 1964 to warn the public about the dangers of smoking (50,51). Concerted efforts since the 1960s to decrease tobacco consumption have had success in reducing the percentage of smokers in the US population, from 42.4% of the adult population in 1965 to 15% in 2015 (52,53). The absolute number of tobacco users in the US was 48.1 million in 1970 (54), 42.1 million in 2012 (55), and 37.5 million in 2015 (53). An estimated 6.8 million people in the US meet eligibility criteria for lung cancer screening, although only 4% of them have pursued it (7,56). This may be at least partly because of the concentration of current smokers within groups of lower socioeconomic status (7) and the inverse relationship between socioeconomic standing and participation in medical screening programs (57,58).

Tobacco and smoking: carcinogenesis
The addictive component of tobacco is nicotine, a natural alkaloid that acts as an acetylcholine agonist and binds to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) in the nervous system, causing release of neurotransmitters into the blood stream, including dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine, endorphins, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). While nicotine itself is not a carcinogen, it upregulates nicotinic receptors and produces alterations in gene expression that foster tobacco dependence and is associated with progression of existing lung tumors (59-61).

Tobacco combustion produces at least 60 known carcinogens. The most significant are polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), including benzo[a]pyrene; nitrates; and tobacco-specific N-nitrosamines (TSNAs), such as 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(13-pyridyl-1-butanone) (NNK) (62,63). Tobacco smoke has a vapor phase and a particulate phase, which respectively produce 1015 and 1017 free radicals per gram (61). The mechanisms of carcinogenesis from tobacco include formation of DNA adducts by carcinogens and their metabolites as well as free radical damage (64). While tar emissions and the amount of benzo[a]pyrene have decreased in cigarette smoke over several decades, there is no convincing evidence that lower tar cigarettes have improved safety (65). Meanwhile, the concentration of nitrates and TSNAs in cigarettes has increased since 1978 (62). Laboratory studies have demonstrated the relationship of NNK to lung cancers, specifically adenocarcinomas (66). The amplified concentration of NNK in tobacco smoke likely correlates with the increase in lung adenocarcinomas relative to squamous non-small cell lung cancer in recent decades.

Menthol as a cigarette additive has been in use since the 1920s. Menthol cigarette advertising in the US has been directed particularly toward women, African Americans and youth (67,68). Menthol, a derivative of the peppermint plant, has the effect of decreasing irritation of mucosal tissues in the hypopharynx and lung as well as producing a minty flavor (69). In addition to making cigarette smoke more palatable, it affects nicotine binding to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and it upregulates expression of nicotinic cholinergic receptors, producing increased addiction and reduced ability to quit (70,71). Up to 90% of the tobacco merchandise currently on the market contains some percentage of menthol, even if not marketed as a menthol-containing product (67,68).Other smoking products
Cannabis sativa
In 2013, marijuana was the most commonly used illegal substance in the US, with up to 12% of adolescents and adults admitting use (72). The number of users is likely to increase as states legalize personal recreational use of the drug. At this moment, the states of Maine, Massachusetts, Colorado, Washington, Oregon, Nevada, California, Alaska and Vermont and the District of Columbia permit recreational marijuana use. Medical marijuana is legal in up to 30 states. Studies on the health effects of marijuana, including risk for lung cancer, have been limited due to previous illegal status and the confounding effects of frequent combined use with tobacco (73,74).

The main psychoactive ingredient in cannabis, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), is not known to be carcinogenic but like nicotine, produces addiction. Up to 17% of people who initiate marijuana in their teens will become dependent, and an estimated 25–50% of daily smokers are addicted (72,75). Also similar to nicotine, there is evidence that THC has a deleterious effect on adolescent brain development (72). The constituent percentage of THC in marijuana products has been increasing over the last 20 years (72). There is an association between marijuana smoking and initiation of tobacco use in young people (76-78).

The combustion of organic material while smoking marijuana does produce carcinogenic substances. The tar levels in marijuana smoke are much higher than those in tobacco, as are the concentrations of polyaromatic hydrocarbons (73,79-81). Inhalation of marijuana smoke causes inflammation of the distal airways with subsequent release of cytokines. There is evidence that marijuana produces molecular histologic changes to the bronchial epithelium that mimic those of tobacco use and are known to be premalignant (80,82,83).

Some case controlled studies in 3 North African countries have suggested a 2.4-fold increased risk for lung cancer in men after adjusting for tobacco smoking and occupational exposures (73). A case control study in New Zealand found a 5.7-fold increased risk of lung cancer in the highest one-third of marijuana consumers, after adjustment for confounding variables (80). Epidemiologic studies to date have not found a strong association between cannabis use and lung cancer (84,85). However, it has been noted that the relatively low prevalence of marijuana use pre-legalization is similar to that of tobacco prior to the 20th century and that impending industrialization of marijuana in the US may have unforeseen consequences (86).

Electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS)
Electronic technology for delivery of nicotine to the lung epithelium via an electronic device became available for sale in 2007. The basic mechanism consists of a battery-operated heating coil that heats fluid contained in a replaceable cartridge, usually a mixture of flavorings, a solvent, and liquid nicotine (87). When evaporated, this produces an aerosol vapor that is inhaled by the smoker, or vaper. Nicotine-containing aerosols can achieve peak serum nicotine levels in under 5 minutes (87). ENDS, also called electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes, have evolved at a rapid rate in the last decade, with 466 brands and thousands of flavorings available as of 2014 (87,88). The diversity of available products as well as individual variations in vaping practices have made it difficult to effectively evaluate the safety of these devices and their use. The disparity in content and quality of the cartridges, especially, is substantial (89,90).

ENDS products are currently unregulated in the US except with respect to mandatory age and photo ID checks to prevent sales to minors. In 2016, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) claimed jurisdiction and regulatory authority over the manufacture, promotion, sale and distribution of ENDS and associated merchandise as newly deemed tobacco products. However, in 2017 the compliance dates for these regulations were extended to 2021–2022, and the registration of entities that manufacture, prepare, compound, or process a newly deemed finished tobacco product now applies only to those corporations that commence those activities on or after August 8, 2016 (91,92).

The prevalence of ENDS usage is 3.2% of adults in 2016. ENDS users fall into three categories: current smokers who use them as an intentionally transitory cigarette smoking cessation device, current smokers who practice continued use and dual use, and previous non- smokers of traditional tobacco (87). The last category is particularly prevalent in young adults; 40% of e-cigarette users between the ages of 18–24 were not previous smokers (93).

Randomized controlled trials have found that e-cigarettes containing nicotine are more effective for smoking cessation than e-cigarettes that do not contain nicotine (94). However, there is no proven benefit over other cessation aids with nicotine (87,95). Dual use is defined as the continued smoking of traditional tobacco cigarettes and electronic cigarettes; there is no evidence of health benefit (87,95). Smokers who converted to exclusive ENDS use were evaluated in a 2-year study that reported no significant adverse events within a 24-month period after switching to an electronic cigarette with nicotine (96). However, there is a lack of short- or long-term safety data. The particles in e-cigarette vapor are different from those in traditional tobacco cigarettes, but available data suggests that formaldehyde, acetaldehyde and reactive oxygen species are present in sufficient concentrations to cause inflammatory damage to the airway and lung epithelium. Microscopic particles from e-cigarettes can deposit in the distal bronchioles or alveoli (87). E-cigarette aerosol can also contain polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, nitrosamines, and trace metals, although concentrations vary (97). Further, nicotine is present in e-cigarette vapor and can cause new addictions in users who are not already smokers (98).

The rise of ENDS use in previous non-smokers is predicated on consumer understanding of the devices as “safer”. Television and magazine advertisements for e-cigarettes utilize traditional marketing ploys of the tobacco industry, such as appeals to freedom, courage and individuality (99). Most troubling is the 900% increase in e-cigarette use in high school students between 2011 and 2015, with over 2 million middle and high school students using ENDS in 2016 (93,100,101). There is evidence that nicotine can damage brain development in adolescents (98). People with depression and anxiety are reported to have higher rates of ENDS usage and may also be a vulnerable population (87). Other at risk populations include rural, low income and LGBTQ individuals (100). Recent studies have shown that use of ENDS and other tobacco products by adolescents and young adults is independently associated with smoking of traditional tobacco cigarettes within a year (102,103).

The recommendations of the CDC at this time with regard to electronic cigarettes are that non-pregnant adult smokers may benefit from ENDS use when completely substituted for previous tobacco habits. E-cigarettes are considered not safe for adolescents, young adults, pregnant women and non-smokers (93).Environmental risk factors for lung cancer
Radon
An association between mining and lung disease has been known in Europe since the 15th century, when miners in the Erzgebirge mountain range along the Germany-Czech border suffered high incidence and mortality from what was then known as bergkrankheit, or mountain disease. Mines in that part of the world produced copper, iron, silver, cobalt, arsenic, bismuth, and, in the 20th century, radium. We now know that the German and Czech mining population had extremely high rates of lung cancer, mostly squamous cell carcinoma (3). In the modern medical era, epidemiologic studies of underground workers in uranium mines have provided the framework for our understanding of radon exposure as a cause of lung cancer (104-106).

Residential radon from soil accounts for the second most common risk factor for lung cancer, estimated 10% of cases (106). Radon is a naturally occurring radioactive gas produced by uranium decay in the earth’s crust. It emits alpha particles, decaying to polonium and then bismuth. The average environmental concentration of radon is 0.2pCi/L (107), but indoor levels can be quite variable depending on soil composition, building foundations and ventilation. Radon can accumulate to unsafe levels in basements and lower building levels (106,108). The US Environmental Protection Agency provides resources for assessing and reducing radon levels in homes. Radon exposure in underground workplaces is regulated in the US (107). Concurrent tobacco smoking increases the relative risk of lung cancer from radon (106,109).

Asbestos
Occupational exposure to carcinogens is estimated to account for 5–10% of lung cancers (69,110-112). Of these, asbestos is the most common. A naturally occurring silicate mineral, asbestos has amphibole (amosite, crocidolite, trenolite) and serpentine (chrysotile) subtypes, and the use of asbestos in construction has been ongoing since the 19th century. Chrysotile fibers have the greatest association with thoracic malignancies (107). Occupational exposure to asbestos correlates with a 5-fold excess risk of lung cancer (69). Asbestos exposure and tobacco smoking have a synergistic effect on the risk for lung cancer (107).

Pollution and air quality
Ambient air quality was suggested as a potential risk factor for lung cancer as early as the 1920s (41). There are two main areas of concern for both outdoor and indoor air quality: carcinogens produced by combustion of fossil fuels and particulate matter in the air (69). Atmospheric carcinogens in the outdoor environment can include PAH, sulfur dioxide and trace metals (69,113). The risk of lung cancer is elevated in occupations that have prolonged exposure to these elements. In this regard, occupational exposures in the trucking industry, for instance, are associated with up to 50% increase in the relative risk of lung cancer (107).

Particular matter in the air increased with industrialization and it began to be regulated in the 1950s (107). The US Environmental Protection Agency in 1997 increased the legal limits on fine particles less than 2.5 µm in diameter (PM2.5) due to evidence of adverse health effects at even low levels of particulate concentration in the air (114). A study of large urban environments in the US found a 40% increased risk of lung cancer in the 6 US cities with the highest levels of particulate matter (69). The risk of lung cancer from fine particulate pollution is increased regardless of smoking status, and the association is greatest in nonsmokers. These is also a correlation with lower levels of education which may influence housing options (114). Particulate matter has been designated a Group I carcinogen by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) (115). The risk of lung cancer from pollution is potentiated with tobacco smoking.

Indoor air pollution from the use of unprocessed fossil fuels such as soft coal and biomass fuels, which include wood, other plant-based materials and solid waste, for heating and cooking is implicated in lung cancer risk, primarily in the developing world. In some parts of Asia it is linked with lung cancer in never smokers (69,116,117). Studies have shown that proper ventilation of previously unvented cooking areas can reduce the risk of lung cancer by 50% (69).

Second hand, or side-stream, tobacco smoke is also an environmental pollutant with a dose response relationship between exposure and lung cancer risk (118). The carcinogens in side-stream smoke include PAH, nitrosamines and aromatic amines. Benzo[a]pyrene concentrations are 4 times higher in side-stream smoke compared with filtered mainstream cigarette smoke (119). Studies have shown the presence of nicotine and its metabolite cotinine as well as DNA adducts from tobacco carcinogens in the urine of nonsmokers with passive exposure to tobacco smoke (119). Nonsmoking spouses of smokers have a 20–30% increased risk for developing lung cancer (119-121). The US Surgeon General has declared that there is no safe level of exposure to second hand tobacco smoke (118).

More recently, questions of second hand exposure to e-cigarette vapor have arisen. While some studies of simulated indoor air quality with ENDS have found no significant levels of chemicals in the environment (122), a non-simulated real life evaluation of indoor air quality at a vaping convention found high levels of air nicotine, particulate matter, total volatile organic compounds (TVOCs), and carbon dioxide in the air that raises concerns for workers and others exposed to second hand vapor (123). Serum cotinine levels in non-smokers from e-cigarette vapor were comparable to those exposed to second hand cigarette smoke in a recent study (124). The US Surgeon General has determined that second-hand e-cigarette aerosol contains harmful and potential harmful components and urges the inclusion of ENDS in comprehensive smoke-free regulations to both reduce involuntary environmental exposure and prevent re-standardization of tobacco use (98,125). To date, very few states have included e-cigarettes in such laws (125).

Infection
Damage to the lung from inflammation and infection is implicated in carcinogenesis. In the past, infections such as tuberculosis conferred an odds ratio up to 1.76 for the development of lung cancer, irrespective of smoking status and with considerable latency (126). There is decreased prevalence of TB in the developed world.

Lung cancer is the most common non-AIDS defining malignancy in people with HIV infection (127). In the era of more effective antiretroviral therapy, lung cancer has become the leading cause of mortality in HIV-infected patients, accounting for nearly 30% of cancer deaths (128). Despite the increased lung cancer incidence with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) (129), there is no evidence that antiretroviral medication itself increases the risk (69). The HIV virus also has not been implicated in oncogenesis, but studies suggest that immunosuppression plays a role, as HIV patients and organ transplant recipients have similarly increased rates of cancer (130). Declining CD4 counts are associated with a higher rate of lung cancer (131). The higher smoking prevalence in the HIV population, with 42% current cigarette smokers in HIV-positive adults in 2009, may be a contributing factor (132). Nevertheless, HIV-infected individuals have a 2.5-fold increased risk of lung cancer regardless of smoking status (69). Lung cancer patients with HIV have lower levels of cigarette smoking and present at younger ages than the general population, are diagnosed at more advanced stages, and have lower survival than the general population (69,128,133,134).Genetic risk factors for lung cancer
Not all tobacco users develop lung cancer, reinforcing a genetic susceptibility to lung malignancy. A positive family history for lung cancer has been associated with a 1.7-fold increase in risk of lung cancer development (135). Some studies have shown lung cancer risk is increased 2 to 4 times in first degree relatives of lung cancer patients, controlled for personal smoking history (136,137).

Genome wide association studies (GWAS) have associated chromosome regions 5p15, 15q25-26 and 6q21 with increased risk for lung cancer (138,139). The 5p15 region encodes telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT), involved in cell replication. In the development of lung cancer, it is associated with adenocarcinomas in smokers and nonsmokers (140). Mutations at the 15q25-26 chromosome locus are positively linked to both nicotine dependence and susceptibility for lung cancer (141). Chromosome locus 6p21 regulates G-protein signaling, and variants confer markedly increased risk on never-smokers (142). GWAS in the Han Chinese and Japanese populations have also found a locus at 3q28, among others, linked with increased lung cancer risk (138).

Tumors acquire intrinsic genetic driver mutations, most of which involve cell signaling pathways including the ErbB protein family (EGFR/HER1-4) and the GTP-ase Kirsten rat sarcoma virus (K-ras) gene (139). Mutations rarely occur in the same signaling pathway (143). Other genetic and epigenetic changes can cause inactivation of tumor suppressor genes such as p53, p16 and PTEN (139). Some mutations have consistent associations with lung tumor histology; for example, EGFR and EML4-ALK mutations are associated with adenocarcinomas in nonsmokers (139).Lung cancer in never smokers (LCINS)
Lung cancer in nonsmokers is a major cause of mortality, now the 7th leading cause of cancer deaths (30). It accounts for approximately 10–15% of lung cancer cases in the US (144). The proportion of LCINS has increased in recent years, even after controlling for gender and race or ethnicity (144). Worldwide, it is estimated that 25% of lung cancer patients are never smokers (145). LCINS occurs predominantly in women and younger patients. The histology is most likely to be adenocarcinoma, often with specific driver mutations like EGFR mutation and ELM4-ALK fusion protein which respond well to targeted therapy (139,145,146). The proportion of female LCINS cases is particularly high in East and South Asia, where 60–80% of women with NSCLC are never smokers (116,117,147). In the US, African American nonsmokers are more likely to develop lung cancer than Caucasian nonsmokers (116).

Environmental risk factors are reported to play a predominant role in LCINS, including second hand smoke exposure, environmental particulate matter, occupational exposures, indoor air pollution, and radon (115,148). Some studies suggest up to 30% of lung cancers in non-smokers are caused by residential radon exposure (149). Genetic susceptibility is also a factor, including genes associated with metabolic syndrome (145,148).Conclusions
Smoking prevalence and lung cancer incidence have decreased in the US over the last several decades as a result of committed tobacco control policies. However, the morbidity and mortality of the tobacco epidemic remain high in the US, and the global epidemic has just started. The history of modern tobacco smoking and the slow and reluctant understanding of its long-term fatal effects should provide a cautionary tale for the healthcare profession as we attempt to understand the safety and potential delayed consequences of marijuana smoking and e-cigarette vaping, both of which are gaining in popularity, access and consumption.
Focus on colon cancer.
Epidemiology
The colon and rectum comprise the final portion of the human
digestive tract, commencing at the ileocecal valve that marks
the end of the small intestine, terminating at the anus, and measuring roughly one yard in length. Cancers of the colon and rectum are the second leading cause of cancer incidence and cancer death among adult Americans, with 135,000 new cases and
57,000 deaths in 2001, and with a 6% lifetime risk of developing
the disease (Greenlee et al., 2001). Encouraging declines in the
death rate from colorectal cancer in the last decade speak to
the potential effectiveness of recent advances in prevention,
screening, and therapy. Cancers of the colon arise from the
colonic epithelial cells that line the lumen of the organ (Figure
1), which renew themselves every five days from a stem cell
population located at the base of colonic epithelial cell crypts.
Colon cancers are the end result of a multistep process of colon
neoplasia that extends over several years (Figure 2). First, neoplastic tubular colon adenomas arise as pedunculated polypoid
structures growing into the colon lumen. With time, they acquire
increasingly disordered villous histology and dysplastic cellular
cytology, and are recognized as frank cancers only when invasive cells breach the underlying epithelial basement membrane
(Figure 1). Reproducible increases in incidence of the disease
in populations that have migrated from low to high incidence
regions of the world show the importance of environmental factors (Skibber et al., 2001). Cohort studies have rejected variations in intake of fiber, vegetables, and antioxidant vitamins as
causative factors, but support that risk increases with red meat
consumption, low folate intake, and sedentary lifestyle (Willett,
2001). The importance of genetic factors is shown by findings
that germline mutations in key colon cancer genes give rise to
familial hereditary colon cancer syndromes that account for
3%–7% of all cases annually (Kinzler and Vogelstein, 1996;
Skibber et al., 2001). Genetic susceptibility factors also likely
play a role in typical “sporadic” colon cancers, as indicated by
the 2- to 3-fold increased risk of colon cancers in first degree
relatives of persons affected by either colon cancer or by colon
adenomas developing before age 60 (Skibber et al., 2001).
Screening
In concept, most colon cancers could be prevented by detection
and removal of premalignant colon adenomas. Likewise, considerable benefit would be predicted by detecting colon cancers
at early stages when the disease is amenable to cure by surgical excision. These considerations have lead to recommendations for mass screening starting at age 50 for the average risk
adult population, and earlier for individuals at higher risk due to
family history or other predisposing factors (Schoen, 2002;Smith et al., 2001). Available screening modalities include
chemical testing for the presence of occult blood in the stool,
endoscopic visualization of the lower portion of the colon by sigmoidoscopy, or full endoscopic visualization of the colon by
colonoscopy, with sensitivities for detecting cancer of
15%–30%, 60%, and 90%, respectively (Schoen, 2002; Smith
et al., 2001). The adoption of mass colonoscopic screening has
been impeded by the expense of the procedure and the 24 hr
required to undergo both a pretest laxative preparation and a
posttest recovery from sedation. The recent successful detection of colon cancer-specific mutations in DNA from the feces of
colon cancer patients has spurred considerable hope for the
development of molecularly based screening (Ahlquist and
Shuber, 2002; Traverso et al., 2002).
Staging, standard therapy, and outcomes
Colon and rectal cancers identified at early stages are highly
treatable and often cured with standard therapies. Surgical
resection of the involved colon is the initial treatment for colon
and many rectal cancers. The likelihood of a recurrence is related to the degree of penetration of the tumor through the bowel
wall and the presence or absence of nodal involvement (Skibber
et al., 2001). These characteristics are the basis for the TNM
clinical staging system shown in Figure 2 and guide recommendations for additional therapy.
Surgical resection is highly effective for early stage colon
cancers, providing cure rates of over 90% in stage I and 75% in
stage II disease. The presence of nodal involvement (stage III)
predicts for a 60% likelihood for recurrence (Skibber et al.,
2001). Treatment of these high-risk individuals with a postsurgical course of 5-Fluorouracil-based chemotherapy reduces the
recurrence rate to 40%, increasing overall survival to 60%, and
is now the standard of care for stage III patients (Skibber et al.,
2001); however, newer adjuvant regimens are clearly needed to
reduce the still substantial failure rate. The benefit of
chemotherapy in stage II patients, who already have a good
prognosis, has been harder to detect and remains controversial.
There is certainly a need to identify better prognostic factors
than TNM stage for guiding selection of individuals who will or
will not benefit from adjuvant therapy. Initial reports suggest that
good molecular prognostic markers (detailed below) include
findings of microsatellite instability and TGF-β receptor II mutations (Watanabe et al., 2001), whereas adverse prognostic
markers include allelic losses on chromosomes 8p and 18q
(Zhou et al., 2002).
The management of rectal cancers is influenced by their
having an increased risk of local recurrence and by the desire to
maintain rectal sphincter function.The addition of radiation ther-Figure 1. Clinical staging of colon cancer relative
to the histology of the normal colon
Clinical staging of colon cancer relative to the
histology of the normal colon. Shown are the
principle layers of the colon including the
mucosa (1), the submucosa (2), the muscle of
the muscularis propria (3), and the subserosa (4).
Also shown are micrographs of a lymph node in
the colonic mesentery, and of the distant liver.
The outlines show the extent of spread of different potential tumors and their stages as defined
by the commonly employed TNM (tumor, nodes,
metastasis) staging system. T1N0M0 (stage I)
cancers are confined to the submucosa.
T2N0M0 (also stage I) cancers invade the major
muscular layer (muscularis propria). T3N0M0
(stage II) cancers breach the muscular layer.
Cancers metastatic to mesenteric lymph nodes
(N1ñ3) are designated stage III. Cancers
metastatic to distant organ sites (M1) such as the
liver are designated stage IVapy either before or after surgery decreases local recurrence,
and the combination of chemotherapy and radiation therapy
with surgical resection is the standard treatment for stage II and
stage III rectal cancers (Skibber et al., 2001).
Metastatic colorectal cancer is present in 20% of individuals
at the time of initial diagnosis and develops within five years in
approximately 30% of those with initially localized disease. The
liver and lung are the common sites for metastasis, along with
peritoneal and local bowel recurrences. A small fraction of
metastases are localized and can be surgically removed with a
30% cure rate (Skibber et al., 2001). When surgery is not feasible, treatment with 5-fluouracil-based systemic chemotherapy
can have a palliative benefit with a modest increase in survival
and quality of life, but most patients succumb to the metastatic
disease within 2 years. Recently, several newer chemotherapies
have been shown to provide an average improved survival of
several months, including the topoisomerase I inhibitor irinotecan (Saltz et al., 2000) and the DNA adduct forming agent oxaliplatin. The major impact of these agents is likely to be as part of
adjuvant therapies that are currently undergoing testing in clinical trials for high-risk patients following surgery.
Hereditary colon cancer
Germline mutations in the APC gene cause the inherited familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) syndrome, in which hundreds
to thousands of colonic adenomas develop during the third to
fourth decade of life, and the lifetime risk of colon cancer
approaches 100% (Goss and Groden, 2000; Kinzler and
Vogelstein, 1996). APC is a classic tumor suppressor gene, with
FAP tumors showing inactivation of the wild-type germline
allele, most often by deletion (Goss and Groden, 2000; Kinzler
and Vogelstein, 1996). APC protein functions as a suppressor of
Wnt signaling by catalyzing the degradation of β-catenin, and
thereby suppressing β-catenin mediated transcriptional activity
(Goss and Groden, 2000; Kinzler and Vogelstein, 1996). The
overwhelming majority of FAP associated APC mutations are
nonsense mutations that truncate the APC protein amino terminal to the β-catenin interacting domain. Mutations at either the
extreme 5′ or 3′ of the APC locus result in an attenuated polyposis phenotype. Intriguingly, adenomas in attenuated FAP often
reveal somatic mutations targeting both the germline mutant as
well as wild-type alleles (Goss and Groden, 2000; Kinzler and
Vogelstein, 1996). Moreover, germline APC alleles with subtle
50% underexpression can also cause the full FAP phenotype(Yan et al., 2002). Lastly, an APC polymorphism (I1307K), recognized among the Ashkenazi Jewish population, creates a
DNA sequence hotspot for subsequent somatic mutation, and
this “premutation” increases colon cancer susceptibility approximately 2-fold (Fearon and Gruber, 2001).
Germline mutations in components of the DNA Mismatch
Repair (MMR) complex are the genetic basis of hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) (Kinzler and Vogelstein, 1996;
Kolodner, 1996; Markowitz, 2000). Carriers of these autosomal
dominant mutations have an 80% lifetime risk of colon cancer,
most often localized to the ascending colon, and an increased
risk of gastric and endometrial cancers. Recent advances in
“conversion” technology allow sequencing of individual
germline alleles and show that over 90% of cases of classic
HNPCC arise from mutations in hMSH2 and hMLH1, which
encode two required components of the mismatch repair complex (Yan et al., 2000). Moreover, germline mutations in hMSH6,
which encodes a component present in a subset of repair complexes, have been associated with colon cancers with later age
of onset and less striking familial aggregation than classic
HNPCC (Kolodner et al., 1999). HNPCC tumors show somatic
inactivation of the second germline MMR allele. MMR inactivation induces a nearly 1000-fold increased spontaneous gene
mutation rates (Eshleman et al., 1995). This “mutator” phenotype accelerates the time for colon cancer development to less
than 36 months. This reflects in part the creation of mutational
hotspots within homopolymeric sequence repeats that are present in the coding regions of some tumor suppressor genes.
The prototypical example is the biallelic mutational inactivation
of the type II TGF-β receptor, discussed below (Markowitz,
2000; Markowitz et al., 1995). Moreover, MMR deficient tumors
also accumulate frameshift mutations in over 40% of noncoding
repetitive microsatellite alleles, and such “microsatellite instability” (MSI) is virtually diagnostic of MMR deficient cancers
(Boland et al., 1998).
Somatic genetics of colon cancer
Genetic instability is a necessary molecular catalyst for colon
carcinogenesis. Mismatch repair gene inactivation underlies
genomic instability in the 13% of colon cancers with the MSI
phenotype (Kinzler and Vogelstein, 1996; Markowitz, 2000).
These sporadic MSI tumors are nearly always near diploid
(Lengauer and Vogelstein, 1998). In contrast, chromosomal
instability is demonstrated by microsatellite stable tumors that
mutations in the TGFβ-RII kinase domain (15% of cases) or in
SMAD4 (15% of cases) or SMAD2 (5% of cases) transcription
factors that are phosphorylated by the TGF-β receptor complex
(Markowitz, 2000).
Mutational inactivation of p53 is also coincident with progression of colon adenomas to carcinomas. Greater than 50%
of colon cancers bear p53 mutations, and these mutations, first
discovered in human colon cancers, are now recognized as the
most common genetic event in human cancer (Fearon and
Gruber, 2001).
Most recently, overexpression of the PRL-3 tyrosine phosphatase has been observed in metastatic colon cancers, and
shown to be due to 25-fold gene amplification in 25% of cases,
suggesting that PRL-3 is a direct genetic target contributing to
metastatic progression (Saha et al., 2001).
Lastly, loss of Muc2 mucin expression, a frequent event in
human colon adenomas and cancers, induces intestinal cancers in Muc2 knockout mice (Velcich et al., 2002).Figure 2. Colon cancer progression
Hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections show the progressive stages of
colon neoplasia. A: normal colonic mucosa; B: tubular adenoma; C: villous
adenoma; D: adenocarcinoma primary tumor; E: metastatic colon cancer
to the liver. Shown above each stage are associated changes in tumor
suppressor genes (designated by red lettering and red brakes) and oncogenes (designated by green lettering and green arrows). Mismatch repair
gene inactivation is recognized by microsatellite instability and acts to
accelerate the progression pathway through increased gene mutation
rates. Shown below each stage are associated changes in growth factor
activities. Activation of COX2 and EGF-R contributes to initiation of colon
neoplasia, whereas TGF-β signaling suppresses neoplastic progression.frequently show both chromosomal rearrangements and aneuploidies (Lengauer and Vogelstein, 1998). While rare mutations
have been detected in BUB family genes that encode components of the mitotic spindle, the common basis of chromosomal
instability remains unknown (Lengauer and Vogelstein, 1998).
MSI cancers largely arise in the right colon, most frequently
in persons not belonging to HNPCC kindreds. The most common cause of these sporadic MSI tumors is epigenetic methylation affecting both hMLH1 alleles (Markowitz, 2000). Such epigenetic methylation can serve as a tumor marker and has, for
example, been detected preoperatively in blood from MSI colon
cancer patients (Grady et al., 2001). Moreover, a propensity to
aberrantly methylate multiple genomic loci may define a distinct
class of colon cancers (dubbed CIMP) (Toyota et al., 1999).
Confirming this model, and elucidating new genetic targets of
aberrant methylation, are issues of great currency (Moinova et
al., 2002).
Activation of the Wnt signaling pathway is an early event
required for colon adenoma formation, and greater than 70% of
nonfamilial colon cancers bear somatic APC mutations.
Alternatively, some colon cancers activate Wnt signaling via activating mutations of β-catenin. Genes induced by Wnt activation
include c-myc, cyclin D1, and PPAR-δ (Goss and Groden, 2000).
RAS mutations, mainly in K-ras, develop in 50% of large
adenomas and 50% of colon cancers, and so are early steps in
neoplastic progression (Fearon and Gruber, 2001).
Mutations inactivating the TGF-β receptor II (TGFβ-RII)
gene arise in 30% of colon cancers and are temporally coincident with the further progression of colon adenomas to colon
carcinomas (Markowitz, 2000; Markowitz et al., 1995). MSI cancers ubiquitously inactivate TGFβ-RII by frameshift mutations
within a 10 base pair coding region poly-adenine repeat
(Markowitz, 2000; Markowitz et al., 1995). In microsatellite stable colon cancers, TGF-β signaling is inactivated by somaticGrowth factor pathways are drug targets in colon cancer
Colon adenomas and colon cancers show increased levels of
COX2 (Stack and DuBois, 2001), which with COX1 encodes
enzymes that initiate the synthesis of prostaglandins and other
eicosnoids. COX2 knockout mice demonstrate remarkable
resistance to intestinal adenoma formation (Oshima et al.,
1996), and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs that inhibit
COX2 induced shrinkage of some colon adenomas in human
clinical trials (Stack and DuBois, 2001). Chronic use of COX2
inhibiting drugs, including aspirin, is associated with a
decreased risk of human colon cancer, and the potential of
these drugs for preventing colon adenomas and cancers is currently being evaluated in prospective clinical trials.
Studies in cell line and xenograft models suggest that
autocrine activation of EGF-R and ErbB2, which are not amplified in colon cancer, is nonetheless requisite for growth of these
cancer cells (Jiang et al., 1998), and is hence a target for anticancer therapeutics (Mendelsohn and Baselga, 2000).
Pharmacologic or genetic inhibition of EGF-R activity impedes
growth of human colon adenomas in culture and development
of intestinal adenomas in murine models (Roberts et al., 2002;
Torrance et al., 2000). Combining an anti-EGF-R monoclonal
antibody, C225, with a cytotoxic agent, Irinotecan, gave significant antitumor effect in patients whose cancer was not responding to Irinotecan alone, implying that interruption of the EGFR
signaling reversed resistance to Irinotecan (Saltz et al., 2001).
While these initial studies need confirmation, they suggest that
interruption of a growth factor signaling pathway overcomes
resistance to a cytotoxic drug. Small molecules showing
promise in preclinical models include inhibitors of EGF-R
(Mendelsohn and Baselga, 2000), downstream inhibitors of the
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway, and a
rapamycin analog that targets TOR. However, disabling a single
molecular target may not always give dramatic clinical effects,
as shown by the lack of activity in the clinic of initially promising
inhibitors of RAS oncogenes and of tumor angiogenesis.
Challenges
Colon cancer stands as a paradigm for our understanding of the
molecular basis of human cancer. Much work remains to be
done in discovering genes that contribute to such basic disease
phenotypes as chromosomal instability and metastatic spread,
and in translating the advances in understanding the molecular
biology of colon cancer into new clinical tools for prevention,
early diagnosis, and better treatments of this disease.
Practice Parameters for Colon Cancer.
The American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons is dedicated to assuring high quality patient care by
advancing the science, prevention, and management of disorders and diseases of the colon, rectum, and
anus. The Standards Committee is composed of Society members who are chosen because they have
demonstrated expertise in the specialty of colon and rectal surgery. This committee was created to lead
international efforts in defining quality care for conditions related to the colon, rectum, and anus. This is
accomplished by developing Clinical Practice Guidelines based on the best available evidence. These
guidelines are inclusive and not prescriptive. Their purpose is to provide information on which decisions can
be made, rather than dictate a specific form of treatment. These guidelines are intended for the use of all
practitioners, health care workers, and patients who desire information about the management of the
conditions addressed by the topics covered in these guidelines. It should be recognized that these guidelines
should not be deemed inclusive of all proper methods of care or exclusive of methods of care reasonably
directed to obtaining the same results. The ultimate judgment regarding the propriety of any specific
procedure must be made by the physician in light of all of the circumstances presented by the individual
patient.INTRODUCTION FOR CLINICAL
PRACTICE GUIDELINES
It is estimated that there were 105,500 new colon
cancers diagnosed in the United States in 2003: 49,000
in males and 56,500 in females.1 This guideline will
focus on colon cancer. Rectal cancer is presented in a
separate guideline. In a national survey conducted by
the American College of Surgeons Commission on
Cancer, the most common presenting symptoms asociated with colon cancer were abdominal pain, followed by change in bowel habits, rectal bleeding, and
occult blood in the stool.2 An individualized approach
to the diagnosis that considers the patient’s symptoms, age, personal history of inflammatory bowel
disease, colon polyps, or colorectal cancer, and family
history of colon cancer or predisposing genetic syndromes (e.g., familial adenomatous polyposis or hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer) should provide for the most cost-effective diagnostic evaluation.3I. DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
Current recommendations for screening and detection of colorectal neoplasms can be found in the So ciety’s previously published practice parameters on
this subject.4 Once a colon cancer has been detected,
prompt preoperative evaluation and treatment is warranted. A crucial part of this evaluation is to ensure
that the patient’s entire colon and rectum have been
assessed with colonoscopy for the presence of synchronous neoplasms. In cases in which the colon cancer prevents the proximal bowel from being examined, colonoscopy should be performed within a few
months of the definitive surgery. Most patients diagnosed with colon cancer will require an operation.
Depending on the patient’s age and health status, a
variety of laboratory, radiologic, and cardiorespiratory
tests may be appropriate to assess the patient’s operative risk.
II. PREOPERATIVE ASSESSMENT
Guideline—Preoperative, carcinoembryonic
antigen level should be obtained. Level of
Evidence (Class II, Grade A)
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is known to be
elevated in a variety of conditions, including colorectal cancer, proximal gastrointestinal cancers, lung and
breast cancers, benign inflammatory conditions of the
gastrointestinal tract, and smoking. It has never been
useful as a screening tool but has proven useful in
individuals diagnosed with colorectal cancer.
Drawing a CEA level has been recommended before and after resection of colorectal cancer.5,6 Obtaining a preoperative CEA is thought to be beneficial
for two reasons. First, postoperative return to normal
of an elevated preoperative CEA is associated with
complete tumor resection, whereas persistently elevated values indicate the presence of visible or occult residual disease.7,8 The interval recommended
most commonly is every three months for the first two
years. This allows enough time for CEA to return to
baseline. Second, elevated preoperative CEA levels
have been found to be an independent prognosticator
of poor outcome. In 572 patients undergoing curative
resection for node-negative colorectal cancer, elevated CEA was demonstrated to be independently
predictive of poor survival.9 Also, disease-free survival is substantially lower in patients with elevated
CEA before surgery. An elevated CEA was associated
with future metastases in 37 percent of patients at five
years vs. 7.5 percent of patients with normal CEA levels.Guideline—Evaluation with preoperative
CT scanning of selected patients is
indicated and routine preoperative CT
scanning is optional. Level of Evidence
(Class II, Grade B)
CT scanning is the modality of choice to evaluate
metastatic, intra-abdominal colon cancer. Its use preoperatively has been debated. CT scans can be used
to evaluate local extension of the tumor and regional
lymphadenopathy, as well as for the presence of hepatic metastases. However, in most cases, the information gained does not impact the decision to operate or the operative approach, and is not comparable
to a postoperative scan that may be used as a baseline. These factors limit its yield as a preoperative
staging modality.
There is little data regarding accuracy of the CT
scan in evaluating local extension. In individuals in
whom there is a suspicion of invasion of an adjacent
organ (because of the presence of a palpable mass,
unusual abdominal pain or other symptoms, or unexplained chemical abnormalities), a CT scan may be
useful for preoperative planning. The sensitivity of CT
scans in detecting metastatic lymphadenopathy
ranges from 19 to 67 percent.10,11 Many series have
reported the utility of CT in detection of liver metastases and cite sensitivities and specificities between 90
and 95 percent for lesions > 1 cm.12 However, this
rarely results in changes in operative strategy. Nearly
all information obtained by preoperative abdominal
CT scanning can be readily obtained at time of surgical resection. Based on these data, the routine use of
CT before surgery is optional. A scan may be beneficial when the results will change the decision to operate or change the operative approach. Abnormalities such as a palpable mass or nearly obstructing
cancer are more likely to have T4 involvement in
which additional preoperative assessment is warranted.
There is a trend toward the routine use of preoperative evaluation of patients with CT scans, especially in cancer centers in which synchronous resections of the primary and metastatic cancers are
increasing. Also, investigational protocols using preoperative chemotherapy for asymptomatic Stage IV
cancer are being investigated. As these and other protocols are implemented, operative strategy may be
altered by the preoperative CT scan, which will be
part of the routine preoperative evaluation in that setting.Guideline—Routine performance of
preoperative chest x-rays is acceptable.
Level of Evidence (Class III, Grade C)
It is common practice among surgeons to obtain a
chest x-ray preoperatively to evaluate the lungs for
evidence of metastatic disease. Although the yield for
metastatic disease is low, the cost is small, and the
utility of the examination is part of an overall preoperative assessment.
III. PREPARATION FOR OPERATION
Once a decision is made that an operation is required and that the patient is a reasonable candidate
for such, it is incumbent on the surgeon to ensure that
the patient is well informed of what may be required
and to make every effort to decrease the potential for
postoperative complications.
A. Informed Consent
Guideline—Informed consent should be
obtained preoperatively. Level of Evidence
(Class III, Grade C)
All patients who are to undergo surgery for colon
cancer need to be clearly informed of the reasons for
and the extent of the proposed resection, the likely
outcome of the surgery, the pertinent complications
and their likelihood of occurring, expected length of
hospitalization and recovery, alternatives to the proposed surgery, and prognosis. The patient and family
must be given the opportunity to ask questions of
their surgeon.
B. Mechanical Bowel Preparation
Guideline—Mechanical bowel preparation
is nearly universally used in elective
surgery. Level of Evidence
(Class II, Grade A)
Despite its nearly universal use, the literature does
not support a defined benefit for preoperative mechanical preparation of the bowel. There have been
five, prospective, randomized, controlled studies
comparing mechanical preparation to no preparation
for elective colorectal surgery.13–17 All of these have
failed to demonstrate any appreciable decrease in infection rates, anastomotic leak, or mortality in patients
undergoing mechanical bowel preparation. However,
because of sample size, they all lack the statistical
power required to exclude the presence of a Type II
error. Even when compiled together and evaluated
with meta-analysis, the numbers are still too few to
reach a reliable conclusion.18
There is no doubt that preoperative mechanical
bowel preparation is the common practice in North
America. Surveys have demonstrated that for elective
colorectal surgery, 100 percent of colorectal surgeons
responding to the survey in the United States prefer to
have their patients take some form of mechanical
prep.19–22 The persistence in using a preoperative
bowel preparation may be justified simply on the basis of the advantages it affords in ease of handling the
prepared colon, the proven safety of the methods
used for bowel cleansing, and the relatively low cost.
Guideline—Outpatient bowel preparation
is generally safe and cost effective. Level of
Evidence (Class II, Grade A)
Because of continuing efforts to reduce the cost of
medical care, preoperative bowel preparation is increasingly being performed on an outpatient basis the
day before surgery. In two studies, one prospective
and the other retrospective, outpatient bowel preparation was found to be safe and cost effective.23,24
Patients who took their prep at home had no greater
risk of operative complications and had a shorter hospital stay. However, these patients do tend to present
for surgery in a relatively dehydrated state and should
receive adequate intravenous fluid in the holding area
before administration of anesthesia.
The potential fluid and electrolyte shifts that can
occur with mechanical bowel preparations should be
borne in mind when preparing an elderly or cardiaccompromised patient for surgery. It is at times more
appropriate to admit such patients the day before operation for their bowel preparation.
C. Prophylactic Antibiotics
Guideline—Prophylactic antibiotics are
recommended for patients undergoing
colon resection. Level of Evidence
(Class I, Grade A)
Prophylactic antibiotics have proven effectiveness
in decreasing the rate of infection, mortality, and cost
of hospitalization after colonic resection.25 There are
a wide variety of antibiotic regimens that are effective.
Although the vast majority of colorectal surgeons in
North America continue to use both oral and parenteral antibiotics,22 it remains unclear whether using
both has an additive effect in lowering infection
rates.26 Regardless which parenteral antibiotic regimen is selected, it is agreed that it must be given
before the start of the operation to be effective.27,28 In
elective colon resection for cancer, the intravenous
antibiotics need not be continued longer than 24
hours postoperatively.29
Although there are several studies proposing the
use of a single preoperative dose of antibiotics,30–34
most of these suffer from a lack of statistical power
because of small study size. There is one large, prospective, randomized trial that has shown that a single
preoperative dose of cefotaxime and metronidazole is
as effective as three doses.30
D. Blood Cross Match and Transfusion
Guideline—Blood transfusion should be
based on physiologic need. Level of
Evidence (Class III, Grade C)
Preoperative blood transfusions may be required
for patients undergoing resection for colorectal cancer.35–38 The need for transfusion is primarily based
on the starting hemoglobin, the patient’s physiologic
status, and extent of intraoperative blood loss.39,40
The immunosuppressive effect of transfusion is
well established.41–44 A number of studies have
shown that patients who receive perioperative blood
transfusions have a greater incidence of infection.35,45–47
The use of autologous blood or leukocyte poor
cells (washed red blood cells) may decrease this
risk.47,48 Whether the immunosuppressive effect of
transfusion is of a magnitude to actually increase the
rate of cancer recurrence is still unproved. Many
studies have reported that patients receiving a perioperative blood transfusion have a greater risk of
cancer recurrence and subsequent decreased survival.35,37,49,50 However; meta-analysis studies have
strongly questioned whether there is a true causal
effect present.39,51 Other factors (extent of resection
required, location of tumor, experience of surgeon) in
patients requiring transfusion may actually be the
cause for the increased recurrence rate.
E. Thromboembolism Prophylaxis
Guideline—All patients undergoing surgery
for colon cancer should receive
prophylaxis against thromboembolic
disease. Level of Evidence
(Class I, Grade A)
Patients undergoing colon resection for cancer
have a high incidence of venous thromboembolism,including deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary
embolism.52,53 There is strong evidence that the prophylactic use of unfractionated heparin reduces this
risk.52 Multiple studies also have demonstrated the
effectiveness of low molecular weight heparin
(LMWH) for this purpose.54–57 A recently published,
prospective, randomized trial in colorectal surgery patients demonstrated that LMWH and subcutaneous
heparin were equally effective for preventing thromboembolism, with the patients receiving LMWH having a slightly higher rate of minor bleeding events.57
Economic analysis on this data favored the use of
subcutaneous heparin as more cost effective.58
By meta-analysis, intermittent pneumatic calf compression has been shown to be effective in reducing
the risk of thromboembolism in cancer patients.59
Whether there is an additive effect by use of more
than one mode of prophylaxis for patients undergoing colonic resection is yet to be determined. However, many surgeons advocate the use of compression
devices and chemical agents for prophylaxis in highrisk patients. For a more in-depth discussion of the
risks and preventative measures available the reader
is referred to the Society’s previously published practice parameters on this subject.60
IV. OPERATIVE ISSUES
A. Operative Technique
Guideline—The extent of resection of the
colon should correspond to the
lymphovascular drainage of the site of the
colon cancer. Level of Evidence
(Class II, Grade B)
The determinant of adequate bowel resection for
colon cancer is removal of the primary feeding arterial
vessel and its corresponding lymphatics. Extended resections have not been shown to confer additional
survival benefit.61 However, tumors located in border
zones should be resected with the neighboring lymphatic regions to encompass both possible directions
of spread. In a study randomizing 260 patients to a left
hemicolectomy or segmental resection for left colon
cancer, median survival between the two groups was
similar, with the only difference being the longer segment of intestine removed in the hemicolectomy
group.61 Complications and operative mortality were
not significantly different.
The length of bowel resected is usually governed
by the blood supply to that segment. Ligation of the origin of the primary feeding vessel ensures the inclusion of the apical nodes, which may convey prognostic significance for the patient.62 A comparison of
patients with involvement of the apical lymph nodes
revealed a 2.5 times more likely mortality than those
patients without involvement.62 This finding is supported by a prospective study of 1,117 patients from
Australia, demonstrating a decreased five-year survival from 54 to 26 percent in patients with spread to
the apical lymph nodes.63 High ligation, resulting in
extended lymphadenectomy, has not been shown to
result in improved survival.64
The value of the “no touch” technique has not been
proven, although there is a theoretic basis for its use.
Concern regarding intraoperative manipulation of the
tumor with shedding of cancer cells into the portal
circulation led to a study by Hayash et al.65 In a small
group of 27 patients, they identified tumor cells in the
portal vein in 73 percent of patients operated on by
conventional techniques vs. 14 percent in patients using the “no touch” technique. However, in a randomized, prospective study by Wiggers et al.,
66 there was
no significant difference in the five-year survival rate
between the two techniques.
B. Synchronous Colon Cancer
Guideline—Synchronous colon cancers can
be treated by two separate resections or
subtotal colectomy. Level of Evidence
(Class II, Grade B)
The reported incidence of synchronous carcinoma
of the colon is 2 to 9 percent.67 Whether to resect the
two lesions separately or by performing a subtotal
colectomy is a decision that is based on the location of
the tumors and a variety of patient factors. There does
not seem to be a difference in outcome or complication rate between the two techniques.67 It has been
shown that synchronous bowel resections can be performed with the same clinical leak rate and mortality
as patients undergoing resection with a single anastomosis.68
C. Contiguous Organ Attachment
Guideline—Colon cancers adherent to
adjacent structures should be resected en
bloc. Level of Evidence (Class II, Grade A)
Fifteen percent of patients with colon cancer will
have tumors adherent to adjacent organs.69 At the
time of surgery, it often is impossible to distinguish between malignant and inflammatory adhesions. Because it has been demonstrated that these adhesions
harbor malignant cells at least 40 percent of the time,
an en bloc excision is necessary to achieve a tumorfree resection.70
In a series of 121 patients with multivisceral organ
involvement, the five-year survival was similar for en
bloc resections regardless of whether the adhesion
was inflammatory or malignant (54 vs. 49 percent).
However, the survival rate was reduced to 17 percent
if the surgeon inadvertently divided a malignant adhesion.71 This finding was confirmed by Hunter et
al.72 in a study of 43 patients with adjacent organ
involvement. Five-year survival was 61 percent when
an en bloc resection was performed compared with a
23 percent five-year survival when the adhesions
were surgically separated.
D. Synchronous Resection of
Liver Metastases
Guideline—Resection of synchronous liver
metastases may be reasonable to perform at
the time of the initial colon resection.
Level of Evidence (Class III, Grade B)
Between 10 and 20 percent of patients will have
liver metastases at the time of their colon resection.
Surgical excision or ablation of these tumors, when
amenable, remains the only means of obtaining longterm survival in this group of patients. It is generally
believed that such anatomic resections are best performed at a later date after recovery from the initial
colonic resection. However, if at the time of the primary colon resection the patient is found to have limited metastatic disease in the liver, which is amenable
to subsegmental resection or metastasectomy, it may
be preferable to proceed with this additional procedure at the time of colectomy. To ensure that the
patient will be left with no gross residual hepatic disease, evaluation of the extent of metastases should
include intraoperative ultrasound and a careful bimanual palpation of the liver before resection. Removal of the metastasis can proceed if the following
conditions are met73: 1) colon resection has proceeded with minimal blood loss or contamination, 2)
the medical condition of the patient will permit combining both procedures, 3) resection can be accomplished with at least 1-cm margin, 4) the incision is
appropriate for hepatic resection, and 5) the surgeon
is comfortable with performing the hepatic resection.
A variety of retrospective studies have demon strated that resection of such synchronous lesions is
safe and can yield five-year survival of 25 to 40 percent.74–77 Provided a 1-cm margin can be obtained,
there does not seem to be any advantage of performing a wider resection.
E. Role of Oophorectomy
Guideline—Bilateral oophorectomy is
advised when one or both ovaries are
grossly abnormal or involved with
contiguous extension of the colon cancer.
However, prophylactic oophorectomy is
not recommended. Level of Evidence
(Class II, Grade B)
The incidence of synchronous metastases to the
ovaries in cases of colon cancer is 2 to 8 percent. As
such, the ovaries should be inspected at the time of
laparotomy for colon cancer. If the ovaries are grossly
abnormal or involved with contiguous extension,
then they should be removed en bloc with the tumor,
similar to contiguous involvement of other adjacent
organs. However, there is no proven survival advantage associated with prophylactic oophorectomy in
patients with colon cancer, because the risk of occult
microscopic disease seems to be low.78,79 If one ovary
is grossly involved, then bilateral oophorectomy is
advised because of the risk of bilateral ovarian metastatic disease.80 The possible need to perform bilateral
oophorectomy should be fully discussed with the patient before surgery.
F. Role of Laparoscopic Resection
Guideline—Relative merits of laparoscopic
vs. open resection for colon cancer remain
unproved at this time. Level of Evidence
(Class II, Grade B)
Multiple studies have been performed demonstrating the feasibility and safety of laparoscopic colorectal
resection for cancer. Adherence to oncologic principles is possible and adequate lymphadenectomy
with disease-free margins can be achieved comparable to open surgery.81–86 However, concerns have
been raised about port site recurrence with laparoscopic techniques.87,88 Conversely, laparoscopic technique may facilitate better preservation of immune
function compared with open surgery.89,90 Ongoing
clinical trials should clarify the relative merit of the
laparoscopic approach for colon cancer resection.9 V. OPERATIVE ISSUES—EMERGENT
A. Obstructing Colon Cancer
Guideline—Patients with an obstructing
right or transverse colon cancer should
undergo a right or extended right
colectomy. A primary ileocolic anastomosis
can be performed in the appropriate
clinical setting. Level of Evidence
(Class II, Grade C)
Multiple nonrandomized, noncontrolled case series
of right-sided colon obstruction caused by malignancy have demonstrated that right hemicolectomy
with anastomosis (without a colonic lavage) is safe
and effective.92–94 Performing an anastomosis in this
setting is dependent on the patient’s general condition at the time of resection and the absence of other
factors that indicate the need for a stoma to be created. Although there are no studies specifically looking at outcomes of extended right colectomies for
obstruction, this procedure with a primary ileodescending colon anastomosis has been advocated in
standard surgery texts.95
Guideline—For the patient with a left-sided
colonic obstruction, the procedure selected
should be individualized from a variety of
appropriate operative approaches. Level of
Evidence (Class II, Grade C)
For patients who present with a left-sided colon
obstruction from cancer, there have been a variety of
surgical options advocated. The most frequently used
are resection with end colostomy and Hartmann’s
pouch, resection with on-table colonic lavage and primary anastomosis, and subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis. Each of these has its proponents.96
The literature does not strongly support the use of any
one of these over the others. There is a single, randomized, control study of left colonic malignant obstruction comparing subtotal colectomy vs. segmental
resection, intraoperative colonic irrigation, and primary anastomosis.97 This study, published in 1995 by
the SCOTIA group, reported that although the mortality and complication rate of these two procedures
was the same, the bowel function at four months was
worse in patients undergoing subtotal colectomy.
Based on this finding, the authors recommended segmental resection with on-table lavage and anastomosis as the preferred choice for left colonic obstruction.However, in the presence of cecal perforation or synchronous neoplasms, a subtotal colectomy was their
preferred option.
The three-stage approach of performing proximal
diversion, then resection, then colostomy closure is
generally thought to be less advantageous because of
its high mortality and morbidity rates.98 Although
rarely advocated, reports of its use (and preference)
still appear in the literature.99 A randomized, controlled trial published in 1995 compared the threestage procedure to the two-stage Hartmann resection
and colostomy closure.100 The author advocated the
three-stage procedure primarily on the basis of finding a smaller risk of permanent colostomy. Most surgeons would rarely use proximal diversion alone as
the initial step in managing a patient with left-sided
obstruction. This has been thought to be a procedure
of last resort for patients with unresectable cancer or
who are prohibitive operative risks.
The most recent development in the management
of patients with malignant obstruction is the option of
inserting a colonic wall stent. This device, when used
in the appropriately selected patient, may relieve the
acute obstruction thereby permitting an elective colonic oral lavage, colonoscopy, and subsequent resection with primary anastomosis. Multiple nonrandomized, noncontrolled case series have demonstrated
that colonic stenting for acute obstructions is safe and
allows for a single-stage surgery to be subsequently
performed.101–104 No randomized, controlled trial has
been performed to compare stenting vs. immediate
surgical resection.
B. Colonic Perforation
Guidelines—The site of a colonic
perforation caused by colon cancer should
be resected, if at all possible. Level of
Evidence (Class III, Grade C)
There is no Level I evidence in the literature that
addresses the surgical treatment of perforated colon
cancer. Most of the management principles are
based on uncontrolled case series and expert opinion.92–95,105 Right-sided colon perforation from a right
colon cancer should be resected. If there is a free
perforation with peritonitis, an anastomosis may be
unwise and the patient is probably best left with an
end ileostomy. The distal end may be brought out as
a mucous fistula or stapled off as a Hartmann’s pouch.
Alternatively, if there is limited fecal spillage, the surgeon may choose to reanastomose the bowel with or
without fecal diversion.
When a left colon cancer perforates resulting in
peritonitis, a Hartmann’s resection is the indicated operation in most settings. In cases in which there is
massive proximal colonic distention and/or ischemia,
a subtotal colectomy may be the best choice. If there
is a limited degree of peritoneal contamination, the
surgeon may choose to perform an ileorectal or ileosigmoid anastomosis with (usually) or without a diverting loop ileostomy.92–95 The older literature had
advocated proximal diversion with suturing of the
perforation for left colonic perforations. This approach has been criticized as insufficient in ridding
the patient of their source of sepsis and leaving the
malignancy in place.95,105
In the case of a right colon perforation caused by a
left-sided colon cancer, most experts advocate a subtotal colectomy. Whether an anastomosis or a loop
ileostomy to protect the anastomosis are performed is
dependent on the surgeon’s judgment about the degree of contamination and the patient’s clinical status.
C. Massive Colonic Bleeding
Guideline—Acutely bleeding colon cancers
that require emergent resection should be
removed following the same principles as
in elective resection. Level of Evidence
(Class III, Grade C)
Hematochezia from a colon carcinoma necessitating urgent operation is an unusual complication.106
Great effort should be made to identify the site of
bleeding preoperatively or intraoperatively using the
variety of techniques described in the literature.106
When the cause of a massive lower gastrointestinal
bleed is a colon carcinoma, its location can usually be
identified by these means. Once the site of the cancer
has been identified, a segmental resection with its
adjacent lymphovascular supply should be performed.95,106,107 Because of the cathartic effect of the
bleeding, the bowel has been effectively cleansed of
the bulk of fecal matter and a primary anastomosis
can be considered. Whether to proceed with an anastomosis or elect to perform an end stoma and mucous
fistula (or Hartmann’s pouch) is based on the surgeon’s judgment about the current clinical condition
of the patient. There are no randomized studies that
have looked at whether one of these two options is
preferable.
In cases in which the site of the bleeding cannot be VI. STAGING OF COLON CANCER
Guideline—Colon cancers should be staged
using the TNM staging system. Level of
Evidence (Class II, Grade B)
Tumor depth, nodal metastasis, and presence of
tumor metastasis have been shown to be the most
significant variables in determining prognosis in colon cancer.109–113 These characteristics are best described by the TNM system of staging. The American
Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) recently revised
this system and recommend subdividing Stages II and
III based on the T Stage of the primary tumor. This
updated edition of the TNM staging system is presented in Tables 1 and 2.114
It is important that accurate pathologic evaluation
of the radial margin of resection be performed. The
AJCC recommends that each operation be given a
resection code to denote completeness of resection:
R0, complete tumor resection with all margins negative; R1, incomplete tumor resection with microscopic
involvement of the margin; R2, incomplete tumor resection with gross residual tumor that was not resected.114
Other factors that are not specifically included in
the TNM staging system can have an impact on the
patient’s risk of recurrence and survival. Microscopic
venous or lymphatic invasion within the specimen
worsen the prognosis for every stage.109,115 Histologic
grade, histologic type, serum carcinoembryonic antigen, and cytokine levels are all independent prognostic factors that are well supported in the literature.109,113,114 In the future, DNA analysis and the
intratumoral expression of specific chemical substances (18q/DCC, p27, p53, aneuploidy, S-phase
fraction, microsatellite instability, thymidylate synthase) may be used routinely to further assess prognosis or response to therapy.114,116,117
Guideline—To be properly evaluated, one
should strive to have a minimum of 15
lymph nodes examined microscopically.
Level of Evidence (Class II, Grade B)
The accuracy of colon cancer staging improves
with increasing the number of lymph nodes evaluated
microscopically.118–123 Ten or more lymph nodes can
be found in 98 percent of colon specimens and 13 or
more lymph nodes can be found in 91 percent of
specimens without using fat-clearing techniques.119
Four separate studies have verified that 15 to 21
lymph nodes need to be evaluated to identify a nodal
metastasis in 95 percent of patients in whom a nodal
metastasis is present.120–123 Using fat-clearing techniques, the mean number of lymph nodes available
for examination increased as high as 58 per specimen.119 Finding these small lymph nodes seems to be
important. In patients without distant disease, 91 percent of lymph nodes containing metastases are < 6
mm in size.124 Equally important for prognosis is finding all of the metastatic lymph nodes.Five-year survivals are significantly decreased for
those patients with more than three metastatic lymph
nodes.125 Many retrospective studies have found an
increased incidence of lymph node metastasis using
immunohistochemistry and polymerase chain reaction techniques.126–130 The majority show significantly
decreased five-year and ten-year survival for those
found to have micrometastases. At the present time,
there is no evidence that the emerging sentinel node
technology improves the survival in colon cancer patients. However, this field of inquiry is still being actively pursued.
VII. ADJUVANT THERAPY
A. Chemotherapy
Guideline—Postoperative adjuvant systemic
chemotherapy has a proven benefit in
Stage III colon cancer and may be
beneficial in certain high risk Stage II
patients. Level of Evidence
(Class I, Grade A)
Treatment failure of colon cancer most commonly
occurs in the liver, peritoneal cavity, or other distant
sites. True isolated local failure is rare, because there
are few obstacles to obtaining adequate margins of
resection within the peritoneal cavity.
Accordingly, systemic chemotherapy is the mainstay of adjuvant therapy for resectable colon cancer.
Patients with Stage III colon cancer are recognized to
be at high risk for recurrence, and administration of
5-fluorouracil (5-FU)/leucovorin for six months postoperatively has proven benefit in decreasing recurrence and improving survival.131 The addition of levamisole does not seem to add any benefit.132 The
addition of interferon alpha-2a does not improve disease-free survival or overall survival, but does increase toxicity.133,134
There is conflicting data regarding the role of adjuvant chemotherapy in Stage II colon cancer. Between
1990 and 1999, four trials have shown no survival
advantage to adjuvant therapy over surgery alone for
Stage II colon cancer, whereas two others did report
an advantage. A recent NSABP meta-analysis has
claimed a benefit for Dukes B2 colon cancer patients.135 Others reviewing this report contested the
conclusion. Patients with Stage II colon cancer who
are considered at higher risk for recurrence include
those with one or more of the following characteristics: tumor perforation, adherence, or invasion of adjacent organs; nondiploidy by flow cytometry; poorly
differentiated tumor; or venous, lymphatic, and perineural invasion.136,137 It may be advantageous for
these patients to receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Ideally, this should be performed within the confines of
a clinical trial.
The role of oral chemotherapy agents, in particular
capecitabine, is still being defined. Capecitabine is an
oral fluoropyrimidine carbamate preferentially converted to 5-FU in tumor cells. In two, large, phase III
trials in advanced colorectal cancer, capecitabine was
superior to 5-FU/leucovorin in terms of tumor response rate, and similar in terms of time to disease
progression and overall survival.138 Capecitabine is
now in clinical trial for single agent adjuvant therapy
in Dukes C colon cancer.
B. Immunotherapy
Guideline—The value of immunotherapy
for colon cancer is undetermined. Its use is
recommended within the setting of a
clinical trial. Level of Evidence
(Class II, Grade C)
A variety of approaches to use immunotherapy
against colon cancer are presently being pursued. Active-specific immunotherapy immunizes the patient
against his/her own cancer cells. Several small trials
(98 patients, 412 patients, 254 patients) have failed to
show an overall benefit.139–141 The trial from Belgium,
of 254 patients, showed no benefit in Stage III disease,
but in Stage II disease recurrence-free survival was
significantly longer, and there was a trend toward a
longer recurrence-free period and improved overall
survival. The small number of patients limited the
power of this study.
Treating tumor cells with neuraminidase increases
their immunogenicity. This vaccine was given after
curative resection of colorectal cancer and compared
with surgical control.142 A total of 301 patients were
randomized. No difference was found in relapse-free
survival or overall survival.
Monoclonal antibodies specific for tumor antigens
also have been investigated. These are cytotoxic by
themselves, and their effect does not depend on the
cell cycle, allowing cytotoxicity to micrometastases,which often are in a quiescent phase. A study of 189
patients with resected Dukes C colorectal cancer were
randomly assigned to receive monoclonal antibody
17-1A postoperatively or observation only.143 After
seven years of follow-up, treatment reduced overall
mortality by 32 percent and recurrence rate by 23
percent. Distant metastases were significantly reduced, but not local relapse rate.
Although each approach has had its share of
successes, none have reached the point of clear clinical acceptance. Therefore, use of this mode of treatment is recommended within the setting of a clinical
trial.
C. Intraperitoneal/Intraportal
Chemotherapy
Guideline—Intraperitoneal and intraportal
infusions of chemotherapy are
recommended only in the confines of a
clinical trial. Level of Evidence
(Class II, Grade C)
In hopes of aiming therapeutic agents more directly
to the site of disease, efforts have been made to infuse
chemotherapeutic agents intraportally or intraperitoneally. The four most recent, large, multicenter trials
of portal vein infusion (EORTC; Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer Research; UK Coordinating Committee on
Cancer Research; Studio Multicentrico Adjuvante Colon)144–147 have not shown any survival advantage for
portal vein infusion in patients with resected colon
cancer.
A multicenter phase III trial from France randomized 267 patients after resection of Stage II or III colon
cancer to resection alone or resection followed by
intraperitoneal 5-FU for six days and intravenous
5-FU during surgery. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy
was well tolerated, reduced the risk of recurrence in
Stage II cancers, but did not reduce the risk of
death.148
Combined intravenous and intraperitoneal chemotherapy with fluorouracil (FU) plus leucovorin (LV)
vs. FU and levamisole was performed with a total of
241 Stage II or III colon cancer patients randomly
assigned to standard therapy with FU and levamisole,
given for a duration of six months, or to an investigative arm, consisting of LV 200 mg m(−2) plus FU 350
mg m(−2) both administered intravenously (Days 1’4)
and intraperitoneally (Days 1 and 3) every four weeks for a total of six courses.149 In patients with Stage II
disease, no significant difference was noted. In patients with Stage III disease, both an improvement in
disease-free survival (P = 0.0014) and a survival advantage (P = 0.0005) with an estimated 43 percent
reduction in mortality rate (95 percent confidence interval, 26’70 percent) was observed in the investigational arm. The results of this trial suggest that combined intraperitoneal plus systemic intravenous
chemotherapy is a promising treatment strategy in patients with surgically resected Stage III colon cancer.149
D. Radiation Therapy
Guideline—The role for radiation therapy
in colon cancer is limited. Level of
Evidence (Class II, Grade C)
Radiation is rarely used in the treatment of colon
cancer. Radiation’s potential for injury to the abdominal viscera limits its usefulness. There have been a
few small studies that have evaluated external beam
radiation as an adjuvant therapy. ECOG PA-285 study
was a pilot study of the effect of large-field external
beam abdominal irradiation as adjuvant treatment for
resectable Dukes C1 and C2 colon cancer.150 Eligible
patients would receive 45 Gy to the tumor bed and
periaortic lymph nodes, as well as 30 Gy to the liver.
Fourteen patients were enrolled. One refused radiation after surgery; one died of acute hepatic radiation
toxicity after a major deviation from protocol. Of the
12 remaining patients, 7 survived for more than 10
years. This study demonstrates the feasibility and acceptable toxicity; however, the numbers are too limited to evaluate survival benefit. A retrospective study
of adjuvant irradiation of the tumor bed in 79 patients
with T4N0 or T4N+ resected colon cancers showed
improved local control in patients with less extensive
disease.151
A small Phase II clinical trial treated 45 patients with
resected B2-3 or C1-3 colon cancer with a 21-week
course of intraperitoneal 5-FU and two courses of 22.5
Gy external beam radiation to the tumor bed and periaortic nodes.152 Therapy was tolerable. Local and regional relapse showed a trend toward reduction with
treatment, but there was no improvement in survival.
Radiation therapy remains unproved as effective
adjuvant therapy for colon cancer. Although used selectively for patients with a perforated tumor or focal
positive margin, its use for generalized abdominal application should be limited to clinical trials.
Cancer of the colon and rectum is second only to lung
cancer as the commonest cause of cancer deaths in adult
Americans. The disease, which causes approximately
50,000 deaths per year, is incurable in half of the
patients at the time of initial diagnosis. Although the
etiology of colon cancer is unknown, a number of
epidemiological studies have suggested that environmental factors such as dietary fat may explain the
higher incidence in urbanized Western society than in
developing countries. ‘. Z However, these studies of human population groups provide very little information
about the evolution and pathogenesis of colon cancer. In
recent years a number of chemical carcinogens have
been discovered which provide investigators with a
reasonably accurate animal model of human colon cancer. These compounds when administered to rodents
produce benign and malignant neoplasms of the colon
which are strikingly similar in most respects to colon
tumors in man. They provide the opportunity to study
under controlled laboratory conditions the induction of
colon cancer, and the effects of manipulation of the
immune system, diet, gut bacteria, and other factors on
tumor production. Our major objective is to review the
available information (only studies published before
January 1, 1978, are included in this review) regarding
the chemistry, metabolism, and mechanism of action of
the more widely used colonic carcinogens, and the
biology of t.he tumors they produce.
Historical Background and Classification of Colonic
Carcinogens
Colonic carcinogens are defined as compounds which
produce cancer of the large intestine; however, the
majority also produce neoplasms in other organs. These
compounds can be classified into five groups on the
Received May 1, 1978. Accepted July 5, 1978.
Address requests for reprints to: Dr. J. T. LaMont, Division of
Gastroenterology. Peter Bent Brigham Hospital, 721 Huntington
Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.
This study was supported by Clinical Investigator Award AM
00138 from the National Institutes of Health and a grant from the
American Cancer Society. Dr. O’Gorman was supported by Training
Grant T32-AM 07121 from the National Institutes of Health.
The authors would like to thank Drs. Selwyn Broitman, Kevin V.
Carey, Martin C. Carey, 2. Myron Falchuk, Steven C. Fiske, and
Jerry S. Trier for their helpful criticisms and suggestions, and Ms.
Teri Fox for her help in preparing the manuscript. 
basis of chemical structure (fig. 1). The first experimental induction of intestinal tumors was reported in 1941
by Lorenz and Stewart,3 who observed multiple small
intestinal cancers but not colonic tumors in mice fed
dibenzanthracene or methylcholanthrene. It was subsequently reported that feeding 3-methylcholanthrene
produced colon cancers in males but not females of
various strains of inbred hamsters.“ Although not
widely used as experimental colonic carcinogens, cholanthrene derivatives are structurally quite similar to
bile salts and cholesterol and, as noted below, may be
produced within the human intestinal tract by bacterial
metabolism of naturally occurring fecal steroids. The
carcinogenicity of the substituted biphenyls, a by-product in the manufacture of dyes, was discovered in the
early 1950’s by several groups investigating the high
incidence of bladder cancer in dye industry workers.
Walpole et al.” produced small intestinal and colonic
adenocarcinomas in a small percentage of rats by subcutaneous injections of dimethylaminobiphenyl or 4-
aminobiphenyl. Compounds of this group are actively
secreted in bile and then carried to the target cells via
the fecal stream. Thus surgical removal of the colon
from the fecal stream prevents colon tumors in rats
treated with these carcinogens.“, i
The serendipitous discovery in 1963 by Laqueur and
his associates8 of the ability of cycad meal to cause colon
cancer in rats led to the discovery that the hydrazine
derivatives are potent colonic carcinogens. These investigators were searching for a possible dietary cause of
the unusually high incidence of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis in Guam. They postulated that cycad meal
made by grinding the nuts of the tropical plants Cycas
circinalis might be neurotoxic to humans because animals which ate the leaves of the plant developed paralysis.” Furthermore, cycad flour was consumed in large
amounts by native Guamanians. Feeding crude cycad
meal to rats failed to produce neurological disease;
however, adenocarcinomas of the colon were observed
in a small percentage of animals. Laqueur very astutely
recognized the potential importance of this unforeseen
result, and subsequently demonstrated’“, ” that the
carcinogen in crude cycad meal was cycasin, a watersoluble glucoside of methylazoxymethanol (fig. 2). The
chemical instability of the latter compound’” and the
difficulty in obtaining cycad nuts seriously limited the
study of cycasin as a colonic carcinogen. These problems colon, When injected subcutaneously MNNG produces
sarcomas at the site of injection. Ii These results suggest
that the carcinogen does not require activation in the
liver or by gut bacteria.
The ability of aflatoxin, a metabolite of the mold
Aspergillus flaws, to produce hepatomas in experimental animals is well known.lH Small amounts of aflatoxin
B, added to drinking water also produce benign and
malignant colon tumors in a small percentage of vitamin A-deficient rats.‘” This observation is of particular interest in view of the widespread contamination of
human foods with these compounds’)” and the report of
colon cancer in two laboratory workers involved in the
purification of aflatoxin.” Several substituted carbamate? and crude extracts of bracken or fiddlehead
fern’:‘, 24 also produce small intestinal and colon cancers
when fed to experimental animals. However, the tumor
yield with these compounds is very low and as a result
they have not been extensively studied.
Dimethylhydrazine-induced Colon Cancer
Because dimethylhydrazine and its metabolites, azoxymethane and methylazoxymethanol, have been the
most extensively studied colon carcinogens, this review
will focus primarily on studies using these compounds.
Rats, mice, and other rodents are excellent test animals
because they rarely develop colorectal cancers spontaneously.‘” Dimethylhydrazine or azoxymethane injected
weekly at a dosage of 10 to 20 mg per kg of body weight
produce colonic adenomas and adenocarcinomas in
rats,‘:‘“7 mice,““. 2H and hamsters.:%” At this dosage
nearly 100% of animals eventually develop one or more
colon tumors, and losses attributable to acute toxicity
are negligible. In addition to colon tumors, a significant
percentage of rats but not mice develop adenocarcinomas of the duodenum and proximal jejunum and squamous carcinomas of the external ear. A few animals
also develop hepatic angiomas and renal cysts. The
latency period, defined as the time interval between the
first injection of the carcinogen and the appearance of
tumors, is approximately 6 months with the above
dosage. Reduction of the dose to 7 mg per kg per week
lengthens the latency period to approximately 1 year
and decreases the number of extracolonic tumors. I4
These compounds are so potent that even a single
injection of dimethylhydrazine”’ or azoxymetham? produces colon cancers in rats after a latency period of 15 to
20 months. Another interesting feature of these carcinogens is that the organ distribution of tumors is dependent in part upon the route of administration. For
example, addition of dimethylhydrazine to drinking
water at a dose of 3 mg per kg per day causes hemangioendotheliomas of the liver rather than tumors.”
However, the same total dose given once weekly by
gavage instead of daily produces colon cancers in the
majority of rats. The age of the animal at the time of
injection also influences distribution of tumors. DruckreyU observed that single injections of azoxymethane to
l-day-old rats resulted in relatively more neuroblastomas and fewer colon tumors compared to a single
injection at 60 days of age. Oral administration of cycasin’:’ to pregnant rats produced brain and intestinal
tumors in the offspring; however, subcutaneous injection of dimethylhydrazine to pregnant rats was not
carcinogenic to the offspring.“” The explanation for
these somewhat contradictory results is not obvious.
Female rodents are slightly less susceptible than males
to the carcinogenic action of dimethylhydrazine:‘“, x and
MNNG.‘“’
The clinical and pathological features of dimethylhydrazine-induced colonic neoplasms are very similar to
those observed in humans. After 3 to 4 months of
treatment the animals develop anorexia, weight loss,
and bloody stools. As the colon cancers enlarge they
may prolapse through the anus or cause bowel obstruction or intussusception. Metastases to the omentum,
lymph nodes, and lung are observed in 20 to 40% of
animals, but liver metastases are infrequent. The location of tum.ors in the rat colon is related to the dose of
carcinogen. At high doses of azoxymethane (15 mg per
kg per week) neoplasms occur predominantly in the left
colon, whereas at a lower dose (7 mg per kg per week)
the right colon is more involved.“’ This observation may
be relevant to human colon cancer which is more
frequent in the left colon in high incidence areas and in
the right colon in low incidence areas3”, :Sg
Metabolism of Dimethylhydrazine and Related
Compounds
Cycasin, dimethylhydrazine, and azoxymethane are
procarcinogens; that is, they require metabolic activation within the host to an active carcinogen. The metabolic activation of dimethylhydrazine’4s 40, 4’ as shown in
figure 2 first involves its oxidation to azomethane, a gas
at body temperature which appears in the expired air of
dimethylhydrazine-treated rats. A second oxidation
converts azomethane to azoxymethane which is then Nhydroxylated to methylazoxymethanol. These metabolic
steps probably occur in the liver and possibly in other
tissues. Methylazoxymethanol is chemically unstable at
body temperature and decomposes spontaneously in
vitro to formaldehyde, water, and nitrogen.‘” During
this decomposition, the alkylating agent methyldiazonium is formed, which generates a reactive carbonium
ion capable of methylating DNA, RNA, or protein.4z
Methylazoxymethanol may also undergo enzymatic metabolism in vivo. Grab and Zedek4:’ have recently presented evidence that methylazoxymethanol is converted
to methymzoxyformaldehyde by the enzyme alcohol
dehydrogenase. Interestingly, this enzyme was present
in high concentration in rat liver and colon, which are
target organs for this carcinogen, but in very low
concentration in jejunum and ileum which are resistant
to methylazoxymethanol.
Cycasin, the original member of this group, is the pglucoside of methylazoxymethanol (fig. 2). Laqueur and
his colleagues showed that cycasin produced colon cancers in rats after oral but not parenteral administration.44 After parenteral injection most of the cycasin
was excreted unchanged in the urine, whereas after
oral administration only 35% or less was excreted
unaltered in the urine, the remainder appearing as
metabolites in the stool and urine. Furthermore, cycasin was not carcinogenic in germ-free rats when given
orally, whereas methylazoxymethanol caused tumors in
germ-free or conventional animals when given by any
route.‘” These observations indicate that intestinal bacteria hydrolyze the glucose from cycasin and release
methylazoxymethanol which decomposes to form the
alkylating agent methyldiazonium (fig. 2).
The carcinogenicity of cycad flour for humans is
unknown. Accurate statistics are not available regarding the incidence of cancer in native Guamanians who
consume cycad flour. However, it is unlikely that this
flour contains a significant amount of cycasin because
the latter is water soluble and is removed during
processing of the cycad nuts which are soaked in water
for several days before milling.4”
The tissues distribution and excretion of dimethylhydrazine have been studied in some detail in an effort to
understand the high yield of colon tumors with this
compound. Radioautographic studies after injection of
[ ‘“Cldimethylhydrazine showed a high uptake of radioactivity in the hepatocytes and endothelial cells of the
liver 1 hr after injection and in the epithelial cells of the
colon 3 hr after injection.” Pozharisski et al.-‘H observed
significant alkylation of epithelial cell macromolecules
along the entire length of the small and large intestine
after injection of [“Hldimethylhydrazine. However, extensive alkylation was also observed in the liver and
kidney, organs which rarely develop tumors. Thus it
appears that tissue distribution of dimethylhydrazine
or its metabolites does not by itself explain the high
incidence of colon tumors. The major excretory pathways of dimethylhydrazine and its metabolites are lung
and urine, which together account for 40 to 50% of the
injected dose.4g The major metabolites in expired air are
carbon dioxide and azomethane; urine contains unaltered dimethylhydrazine, azoxymethane, azomethane,
and methylazoxymethanol.4U Several investigators”“, x
have suggested that dimethylhydrazine is converted to
azoxymethane and azoxymethanol in the liver which
are then conjugated with glucuronic acid and secreted
in bile. The glucuronides could be hydrolyzed by bacterial P-glucuronidase in the colon and finally metabolized to the active carcinogen. Although this pathway
may occur, it is not an absolute requirement for subsequent development of colon cancers. For example, Wittig et al.“’ administered dimethylhydrazine to rats after
first removing a segment of the distal colon from the
fecal stream by performing a diverting colostomy. Colon
cancers developed in the defunctionalized segment, although at a slightly reduced incidence compared to
nonoperated rats. Zedek et al.“’ demonstrated inhibition
of DNA synthesis in the duodenum and colon of rats
with a total biliary fistula after injection of methylazoxymethanol. These studies indicate that dimethylhydrazine and its metabolites can be transported to colonic
epithelial cells via the blood stream, and do not require
biliary excretion to produce tumors.
The yield of colon cancers can be modified by compounds which alter the metabolism of dimethylhydrazine. For example, addition of the antioxidant disulfi-ram to the diet of dimethylhydrazine-treated mice completely prevents colon cancers.“:1 Fiala et al. demonstrated that disulfirar@ and related compounds4” block
the oxidation of azomethane, thereby decreasing the
concentration of the active carcinogen. The addition of
selenium to the diet also inhibits both dimethylhydrazine and methylazoxymethanol-induced colon cancers
by an unknown mechanism.“5 This observation is of
interest in view of the suggestion from several epidemiological studies that human cancers are more common
in areas of selenium deficiency.5’i. J7
Minor structural modifications of dimethylhydrazine
greatly alter its organ specificity. For example, diethylhydrazine, azoethane, and azoxyethane in which an
ethyl group is substituted for a methyl group do not
produce colon cancers but rather tumors of the brain,
spleen, thymus, mammary gland, and liver.‘lxs X’ Methylbutylhydrazine and methylazoxybutane produce skin
and central nervous system tumors in high yield and
colon tumors in much lower yield than the parent
compound dimethylhydrazine.‘” These findings led
Druckrey’” to speculate that the methyl groups of dimethylhydrazine are important for the high yield of
colon tumors. Tissue distribution of the carcinogen may
be an important factor in the shift in tumor yield in
various organs after alkyl substitution. Thus PozharisskiJX was unable to detect significant alkylation of
intestinal epithelial cell macromolecules (DNA, RNA,
protein) after injection of diethylhydrazine. However,
this compound caused marked alkylation of macromolecules in the spleen, thymus, and brain, organs in
which tumors eventually developed.
Toth”” has raised the intriguing possibility that synthetic or naturally occurring hydrazines might be involved in human carcinogenesis. Hydrazines as a group
are extremely potent carcinogens in experimental animals, and many of them occur in our environment as
industrial or food contaminants and as natural constituents of several plants. For example, the substituted
hydrazines, l,l-dimethylhydrazine and monomethylhydrazine, are used industrially as components of rocket
fuel,“’ whereas 2-hydroxyethylhydrazine is used as a
ripener for pineapple and other plants.“” Unsubstituted
hydrazine occurs naturally in tobacco,‘i:3 and several
types of substituted hydrazines occur in wild and cultivated mushrooms consumed by man.“““4 These interesting observations will hopefully stimulate further studies of the potential role of hydrazines in human neoplasia.
Mechanism of Action and Pathogenesis
Chemical carcinogens produce tumors by modifying
the genome of the cell, resulting eventually in alterations of the cell phenotype, such as loss of differentiation, invasiveness, or abnormal proliferative behavior.“” The carcinogenic action of dimethylhydrazine and
related compounds appears to involve methylation of
colonic epithelial cell DNA. Within hours of injection of
dimethylhydrazine, nucleic acids methylated in various
positions can be identified in the mouse and rat colonic
epithelial cells.““, Ii ’ However, methylation of colonic
DNA is by itself not a sufficient explanation for the
high yield of colon cancers with dimethylhydrazine
because Pozharisski et al.4x observed significant alkylation in the liver and kidney as well as in the small and
large intestine 6 hr after a single dose of dimethylhydrazine. Recent studies with carcinogenic nitrosamines and
nitrosamides have suggested that the formation and
persistance of O”-alkylguanine (guanine alkylated on
the 6-oxygen position) are closely correlated with the
eventual formation of tumors in various tissues.“x, ‘i!’
This structural alteration may allow guanine to pair
with thymine rather than its normal partner cytosine,
thus producing a genetic mutation in subsequent replications. Rogers and Pegg’” observed the formation of
substantial amounts of O”-methylguanine in rat colon
after a single injection of dimethylhydrazine. However,
the liver and kidney, which are not target organs at
this dosage, contained even greater amounts of O”-
methylguanine. It is clear from these studies that
factors other than the extent or type of alkylation of
DNA must explain the high yield of colon tumors
obtained with these compounds.
The relatively rapid cell turnover in the colon compared to the liver might also contribute to the high
yield of colon tumors. Partial hepatectomy, which
greatly increases cell turnover in the remaining liver,
is known to enhance the formation of liver tumors after
a single dose of dimethylnitrosamine” or methylnitrosourea.” However, cell turnover is also quite rapid in
the stomach and distal small intestine, but tumors do
not occur in these organs after administration of dimethylhydrazine. Delayed or incomplete repair of damaged DNA in the colon compared to other organs has
been suggested as a possible explanation for the high
yield of colon tumors with this agent. Kanagalingam
and Balis’:’ observed delayed repair of colonic DNA
compared to small intestinal DNA after a single dose of
dimethylhydrazine. These unrepaired DNA breaks in
colonic epithelial cells would presumably enhance tumor formation in the colon. Whatever the mechanisms
involved, the colon of rats, like that of man, is inherently more susceptible to carcinogens than the small
intestine despite rapid cell turnover in both. This was
well illustrated by the interesting experiments of Gennaro et al.‘” in which a segment of the small intestine
was transposed to the left colon and a segment of the
left colon was transposed to the midsmall bowel of rats.
Subsequent treatment of these rats with azoxymethane
resulted in a high incidence of cancer in the segment of
transposed large intestine, but no tumors occurred in
the portion of the small bowel transposed to the colon.
These studies indicate that the colonic epithelium is
much more susceptible to chemical carcinogenesis than
the small intestine and that this susceptibility is probably not related to differences in cell turnover or bacterial flora.
The acute and chronic effects of dimethylhydrazine
and related compounds on DNA synthesis and cellular
proliferation have been studied using biochemical, morphological, and radioautographic techniques. In general, these carcinogens have a biphasic effect on the colonic epithelial cell, characterized by an initial acute
depression of DNA synthesis lasting several days followed by a prolonged period of increased cellular proliferation. LGhrs et al.‘: showed that a single subcutaneous dose of dimethylhydrazine caused pyknosis and
vacuolization of the nuclei of small and large intestinal
crypt cells. These acute toxic effects were accompanied
by a transient depression of cellular replication which
returned to normal 72 to 96 hr after administration of
the drug. Similar findings were reported by Zedek et
al. 32 who demonstrated that injection of methylazoxymethanol acetate caused a significant depression of
DNA synthesis in the colon but not small intestine
lasting 72 hr. Intrarectal instillation of dimethylhydrazine caused a profound decrease of the labeling index in
the distal colon which was detectable as early as 1 hr
after administration of the carcinogen. iti
After this acute, toxic depression of DNA synthesis
there is an increase in mitotic activity and a widening
of the proliferative zone which persists throughout the
latent period. These alterations of cellular proliferation
are generalized in the colon and occur in epithelium
which is morphologically normal. Chan et al.‘” observed
a significant increase in the labeling index of the distal
colon 24 hr after the intrarectal instillation of a single
dose of dimethylhydrazine in mice which persisted for 2
weeks. Similarly, Thurnherr et al.‘x described a widening of the proliferative zone in the colonic epithelium of
mice 45 days after initiation of weekly dimethylhydrazine injections. At 97 days there was mitotic activity in
morphologically normal surface epithelium and a doubling of the percentage of dividing cells in the colonic
crypt. Interestingly, cellular proliferation was normal
in the jejunum, an organ not susceptible to tumor
formation. An increase in the labeling index does not
occur in the dimethylhydrazine-treated rat; however, a
widening in the proliferative zone is observed.:’ Similar
abnormalities of cellular proliferation have been described in the morphologically normal colonic mucosa of
patients with familial colonic polyposis.ix The significance of these changes in cell turnover, particularly
their specificity for the preneoplastic state, is presently
unknown.
Tutton and Barkla have performed detailed studies of
cell kinetic parameters and the regulation of cell division in normal and noeplastic rat colonic epithelial
cells.7+x:3 These investigators initially observed that the
biogenic amines, noradrenaline, serotonin, and histamine, accelerated crypt cell division in rat jejunum.%
Injection of reserpine, which depletes tissue stores of
these compounds, caused a marked depression of cell
turnover in both normal colon and colon cancers.80
Certain agents produced a differential effect on cell
proliferation in normal colon versus colon cancers. For
example, the monoamine oxidase inhibitor nialamide
had no effect on cellular proliferation in normal colon
but produced increased cell division in tumors.80 Similarly, the tr-adrenergic blocker phentolamine decreased
cell proliferation in normal colon but was without effect
on tumors., whereas epinephrine inhibited and propran0101 accelerated cell proliferation in tumors but had no
effect in normal tissue.81 Differential cytotoxicity was
observed with 5,6_dihydroxytryptamine, a synthetic analogue of the naturally occurring amine 5-hydroxytryptamine.#” Injection of this compound into rats bearing
dimethylhydrazine-induced colon cancers caused widespread necrosis of the tumors but had no significant
effect on normal tissues.x” These studies indicate that
the regulation of cell proliferation differs greatly in
normal versus neoplastic colonic epithelial cells. It may
be possible to exploit these differences in designing
chemotherapy programs directed against colon cancers.
For example, a drug which inhibited cell division in
normal colonic epithelium but not in tumor cells would
enhance the effectiveness of antineoplastic drugs which
are active in dividing cells.
Several biochemical alterations occur during the latent period between the administration of the carcinogen and the appearance of tumors which may be relevant to the pathophysiology of the premalignant state.
Boffa et al.“” demonstrated a striking increase of several
nuclear nonhistone proteins in the colonic epithelial
cells but not hepatocytes of dimethylhydrazine-treated
rats. The synthesis of these proteins increased after 7
weeks of dimethylhydrazine treatment, well before the
appearance of tumors. Alterations in mucus synthesis
have also been described in normal-appearing colonic
epithelial cells during carcinogenesis. In normal rat
colonic epithelial cells there is a predominance of sulfomucins, whereas in the dysplastic colonic epithelium
of dimethylhydrazine-treated rats the mucin is rich in
sialic acid.x” Similar changes in epithelial mucins have
been described in the transitional epithelium surrounding human colon cancers.8ti. xi It is possible that these
changes in nucleoprotein and mucin synthesis are simply a reflection of the increased cellular turnover which
occurs after dimethyl hydrazine injection.
Pathology of Experimental Colon Cancers
The morphological evolution of colonic neoplasms has
been studied in rats,gcT 27 mice,‘8T 2y and hamsters”O killed
at various times after starting weekly dimethylhydrazine injections. The earliest morphological alteration is
the appearance of discrete areas of protuberant surface
epithelium which is detectable by scanning electson
microscopy.xx, x9 These elevations of the surface epithelium are apparently secondary to an elongation of the
crypt and an increase in cell proliferation. The light
microscopic changes occurring in the colons of rodents
injected weekly with 20 mg per kg of dimethylhydrazine
can be summarized as follows. Between 5 and 12 weeks
of treatment a decrease in goblet cells and hyperplasia
of gland units occurs. Areas of focal atypia appear
between 10 and 15 weeks, and severe atypia or carcinomas in situ appear at 14 to 16 weeks. Microscopic
adenocarcinomas develop between 12 and 18 weeks, and
by 18 to 24 weeks visible adenocarcinomas are present
in the majority of animals. Benign adenomatous polyps
also develop in the majority of animals and multiple
benign and malignant neoplasms in various stages of
evolution occur in the same animal. Unequivocal transition of a benign, noninvasive adenoma to an invasive carcinoma has not been documented in this animal
model. Carcinomas are locally invasive at the earliest
stages, whereas adenomas grow to large size without
developing features of malignancy.” In contrast, Morso+’ has suggested that most human colon cancers do
not arise de novo but result from malignant degeneration of previously benign adenomas.
The histopathological features of dimethylhydrazineinduced colonic neoplasms in rats and mice”‘, y2 have
been carefully described. Mutinous adenocarcinomas
occur primarily as sessile or plaque-like lesions in the
proximal half of the colon adjacent to lymphoid follicles.
These tumors consist primarily of mucus-laden signet
ring cells which invade the serosa and metastasize to
regional lymph nodes and peritoneum. In contrast,
polypoid adenomas and nonmucinous adenocarcinomas
occur more frequently in the distal half of the colon.
Polypoid lesions are classified as either polypoid adenocarcinomas or polypoid adenomas containing areas of
extreme atypia or carcinoma in situ but without invasion of the stalk. Interestingly, hamsters treated with
dimethylhydrazine develop only invasive carcinomas
without adenomas.30 A high proportion of ratsa but not
miceZx, 2g treated with dimethylhydrazine also develop
well differentiated adenocarcinomas in the duodenum
and to a lesser extent in the jejunum. The majority of
these tumors arise within several centimeters of the
entrance of the bile duct, suggesting that an activated
carcinogen is secreted in bile.
Electron microscopy of experimental colon cancers
reveals great variability in size and shape of tumor cells
compared to the normal columnar epithelial cell of the
colon. Tumor cell microvilli are sparse, blunt or clubshaped, and arranged asymmetrically, and surface glycoproteins, as demonstrated by ruthenium red staining,
are greatly reduced compared to normal.Xa, x9 Mucus
contentH”,“” is likewise markedly reduced in colon cancers compared to the normal epithelium. LaMont et
al.!‘:’ previously reported that rat colon cancer cells have
a significant decrease in activity of the glycosyltransferase enzymes involved in the synthesis of the carbohydrate portion of colonic mucin. Similar reductions in
glycoprotein synthesis have also been described in human colon cancers”“, 95 and presumably reflect the dedifferentiated state of the colon cancer cell. We have
recently demonstrated a sharp increase in glycoprotein
synthesis+‘” and in the specific activity of galactosyltransferasey7 in rat colonic mucosa during late fetal
development. These studies indicate that the undifferentiated fetal and neoplastic cells produce low levels of
cellular glycoproteins compared to the fully differentiated adult epithelial cell.
Tumor Immunity
The availability of a reproducible colon cancer model
has provided an excellent opportunity to study the
relationships between immune factors and tumor
growth. The majority of studies to date indicate that the
antigenic properties of colon cancers, and the hostimmune defenses directed against these tumors, are
strikingly similar in animals and humans. Garmaise et
al.“x reported a tumor-associated antigen in rat colon
cancers which was also detectable in the sera of tumorbearing rats and fetal rat tissues, but not in normal rat
colon. Abeyounis and Milgromss also demonstrated an
antigen in dimethylhydrazine-induced rat colon cancers
which was also present in high concentration in fetal
intestine, but not in other rat tumors. This antigen was
detected in normal colonic epithelium but at a concentration 250-fold less than in the colon cancers. Rat colon
antigens were further characterized by Martin et al.““’
who described two glycoprotein antigens in colon cancers also present in trace amounts in goblet cells of the
normal colonic mucosa. The tumor-associated antigen
was localized by immunofluorescence to the apical
membrane of the tumor cell, and in the mucus in the
lumen of the glands. These characteristics of rat colon
cancer antigens are quite similar to human carcinoembryonic antigen, an antigenic glycoprotein found in
colon cancer surface membranes and fetal colon, and in
much smaller quantities in normal human colon.““-““’
However, immunological cross-reactivity between rat
colon cancer antigens and human carcinoembryonic
antigens has not been demonstrated.
The cell-mediated immune responses of rats to chemically-induced colon cancers have been carefully studied
by Steele and Sji@ren’04-‘ox and resemble in most respects the immune responses of human patients to their
colon cancers. Lymphocytes from rats bearing colon
cancers induced by either dimethylhydrazine, MNNG,
or dimethylaminobiphenyl were cytotoxic against colon
cancer target cells induced by all three agents but not
against normal rat kidney cells or other types of rat
tumors.“” Peripheral lymphocytes from tumor-bearing
rats were also cytotoxic to fetal colon cells, but not other
fetal tissues.““’ This lymphocytotoxicity could be
blocked in vitro by a factor in the sera of tumor-bearing
rats.““’ By using serial air-contrast barium enemas of
dimethylhydrazine-treated rats, it was possible to demonstrate blocking activity in the sera of rats before a
visible tumor had formed, and to show its disappearance
after successful tumor excision. Similar studies in humans indicate that circulating lymphocytes from most
colon cancer patients are cytotoxic to human colon
cancer cells from the same patient or different patients,
but not to other tumor cells or normal colon cells. “‘x I”’
Serum from patients with colon cancers”’ and membrane extracts of colon cancers”2 blocked the lymphocytotoxicity. The relationship of these in vitro phenomena to in vivo tumor rejection in man or animals has
not been established.
The effects of manipulation of the immune system on
subsequent tumorogenesis have been the subject of
several investigations. Steele and Sj6gren’0x demonstrated that immunization of rats with colonic cancer
cells elicited a protective immune response. Rats were
first injected in the leg with a suspension of viable
tumor cells obtained from an MNNG-induced colon
cancer cell line. After a visible tumor developed the leg
was amputated, and the same animals were then immunized with irradiated tumor cells from the same cell
line. Rats immunized in this fashion were able to reject a subsequent challenge of the same type of colon cancer
cells, whereas rats immunized with other tumor cells
were not protected. This study indicates that rat colon
cancer antigens are capable of eliciting a specific immune response which is protective against subsequent
tumor challenge. However, there is no evidence to date
that manipulation of the immune system protects
against the development of cancer or is beneficial in an
animal that already has cancer. Kroes et al.“:{ studied
the effect of antilymphocyte globulin on azoxymethaneinduced colon cancers in rats. Although allogeneic skin
grafts survived longer in the rats treated with antilymphocyte globulin, there was no change in the incidence
or time of appearance of colon cancers. Bacillus Calmette-G&r-in (BCG), a nonspecific stimulator of the
immune system, is an effective antitumor agent in
several animals and human cancers.“1 However, administration of BCG to rats previously given a tumorproducing dose of dimethylhydrazine had no effect on
the subsequent rate of development, size, or metastatic
behavior of colon cancers.“” Intralesional injection of
BCG directly into fully developed rectal cancers was
likewise without benefit.
Role of Dietary Fat, Bile Acids, and Bacteria in
Experimental Colon Cancer
The experimental colon cancer model has been widely
used to test various hypotheses concerning the complex
interrelationship of dietary fat, bile acids, and bacteria
in the etiology of human colon cancer. A positive
correlation between the amount of dietary fat and the
incidence of human colon cancer was first noted by
Wynder et al.” in 1969. This was more convincingly
documented in the studies of various mainland and
migrant Japanese populations, which showed a parallel
increase in colon cancer and animal fat intake after
migration from Japan to Hawaii”” and the continental
United States.“’ Hill”x, ‘I!’ suggested that the increased
animal fat consumption in urbanized Western society
caused increased biliary excretion of bile acids and
cholestero.1, which are converted by colonic bacteria to
secondary bile acids and fecal sterols such as coprostanone and coprostanol. These compounds might then be
further metabolized by the colonic flora to steroid carcinogens such as phenanthrenes. Several laboratory
and epidemiological observations have been marshalled
to support this hypothesis. Deoxycholic acid can be
chemically converted in vitro to 20-methylcholanthrene,
a potent carcinogen.“” In 1941, Druckrey et a1.12’
showed th.at the noncarcinogenic bile salt dehydronorcholene was converted to a weak carcinogen by incubation with bacteria cultured from human stool. It should
be noted, however, that a colonic carcinogen has not
been identified in human stools. Individuals from geographic areas with a high incidence of colon cancer
excrete more bile acids and neutral sterols in their
stools than individuals from low incidence areas.‘=
Certain bacterial species in human stool can convert
bile acids into polycyclic aromatic compounds which are
potential colonic carcinogens.‘“:‘* I24 Furthermore, the
stools of 75% of patients with colon cancers compared to
8% of normals contain both high levels of fecal bile
acids as well as clostridia species capable of metabolizing the steroid nucleus.‘“Z Although these studies suggest a causal role of dietary fat in human colon cancer,
further experimental and epidemiological studies are
required to confirm these data and establish the validity
of these hypotheses. The minor fecal bile acids in man
have not been studies as regards their carcinogenicity
in experimental test systems. Wide individual variation
of the mean daily excretion of fecal sterols occurs in
humans resulting in significant overlap between patients with cancer and normal controls.‘2” The diet of
urbanized Western countries differs in many ways other
than fat intake from the diet in underdeveloped countries. Our diet contains hundreds of additives, preservatives, fertilizers, pesticides, and organic contaminants
from soil and water which are potential colonic carcinogens.
A positive correlation between fat intake and colon
cancer has also been documented in animal studies.
Nigro et al.lZ7 demonstrated that azoxymethane-treated
rats fed a diet enriched with 35% beef fat developed
twice as many small and large bowel tumors as rats fed
regular chow. A greater percentage of animals on the
beef fat diet had metastases to the peritoneum than the
rats on the regular diet. The tumor-enhancing effect of
fat was not limited to animal fat. Thus enrichment of
the diet with 20% corn oil was just as effective as 20%
beef fat in increasing the yield of colonic neoplasms
with dimethylhydrazine.“X The effect of dietary fat in
these studies was not related to nonspecific nutritional
effects because body weight was comparable in the
treated and control groups. Furthermore, the mechanism did not appear to involve an alteration of hepatic
or bacterial metabolism of the carcinogen because a
high fat diet also enhanced colon tumor production with
methylnitrosourea, a direct alkylating agent administered intrarectally.“” Reddy et al.‘:“’ suggested that the
increase in colon tumors observed with high dietary fat
was attributable to a 2-fold increase in bile salts and
sterols in the stools of rats fed 20% corn oil compared to
5% corn oil.
Dietary factors might also alter the bacterial flora of
the gut and thereby influence the intraluminal metabolism of fecal sterols or exogenous carcinogens. For
example, rats fed a diet enriched with ground beef had
a marked increase in their stools of the bacterial enzymes, nitroreductase, azoreductase, and p-glucuronidase, compared to grain-fed rats.‘“‘~ lx2 It was speculated
that these bacterial enzymes could synthesize endogenous carcinogens in the colon by reducing nitro- and
azocompounds to aromatic amines. Intestinal bacteria
may also be involved in the metabolism of colonic
carcinogens because the tumor yield with dimethylhydrazine is decreased in germ-free rats, whereas that of
azoxymethane is increased.‘:‘“, I:$4 Careful studies of the
metabolism of these compounds in conventional and
germ-free animals are obviously required.
The possibility that bile salts might be involved in
the etiology of colon cancer is based on older studies
demonstrating that certain bile salts were carcinogenic when injected into rodents. Injection of deoxycholate,
apocholic, or bisnor-5-cholenic acid (of questionable purity) into rats caused sarcomas at the injection site in a
small percentage of animals. ‘9rr’:(i The possibility that
fecal bile acids might act as intraluminal carcinogens
or cocarcinogens has been tested directly in the experimental colon cancer model. Narisawa et al.‘3x produced
rectal and colon cancers in rats with a single intrarectal
instillation of MNNG, a topical carcinogen. The animals were then given a daily intrarectal instillation of
1 mg of either lithocholic or taurodeoxycholic acid in
peanut oil for 11 months. Rats given the carcinogen plus
bile acids developed approximately 4 times as many
adenomatous polyps but the same number of cancers as
rats given the carcinogen alone. Instillation of the bile
acids alone did not produce tumors. Cholic, deoxycholic,
and chenodeoxycholic acid also increased the yield of
carcinomas and adenomas in germ-free rats treated
with MNNG and increased the yield of adenomas in
conventional rats.13”, I40 Further evidence for the tumorpromoting effect of bile salts was provided by Chomchai
et a1.14’ who surgically implanted the common bile duct
of rats into the midportion of the small intestine, then
induced colon tumors with azoxymethane. Animals
with surgically transposed bile ducts developed 2 to 3
times as many colon tumors as nonoperated animals.
This effect was attributed to a doubling of fecal bile salt
concentration in the operated group. The mechanism of
the tumor-enhancing properties of bile acids in these
studies is not known. It is possible that instillation of
bile acids into the rectum increases cell turnover, which
is known to enhance tumor yield in other experimental
models.“” It is unlikely that the bile acids themselves
were converted to a carcinogen because rectal instillation of bile salts alone for 1 year did not cause tumors.
Furthermore, bacterial metabolism of bile salts was not
required because bile salts promoted tumor yield in
germ-free animals. 13$. 14”
The effects of cholestyramine on experimental colon
cancer appear to be contradictory to the results obtained
with bile salts. Coadministration of cholestyramine and
dimethylhydrazine or azoxymethane to conventional or
germ-free rats significantly increased the yield of colon
cancers.‘“‘-‘4” These results are unexpected because cholestyramine binds bile salts within the lumen and
should prevent their interaction with colonic epithelial
cells. Much further work is obviously required to unravel the complex interrelationships of bile acids, sterols, bacteria, and colonic carcinogens.
Dietary Fiber
Burkitt”” has implicated a relative deficiency of dietary fiber as a contributing factor to the high incidence
of colon cancer in Western man. A deficiency of fiber
would reduce intestinal transit time, thus allowing
carcinogens in the colonic lumen to maintain longer
contact with the mucosa. To test this hypothesis Ward
et a1.14” compared the tumor yield of azoxymethanetreated rats fed either a low residue diet or a diet
supplemented with 20 or 40% cellulose. Cellulose caused
a marked increase in fecal weight, but had no significant effect on the yield of colon tumors. Similarly,
increasing the intestinal transit time of rats with cathartic doses of magnesium sulfate likewise had no
effect on colon cancer yield with dimethylaminobiphenyl, a carcinogen which exerts its action within the
colonic lumen. ‘,‘li
Genetic Factors
Increased genetic susceptibility to colon cancer occurs
in patients with familial colonic polyposis’“‘, ‘-1X and in
certain families without preexisting polyposis.‘-“‘, ‘x’ The
relative susceptibility or resistance of various strains of
mice to dimethylhydrazine carcinogenesis is also genetically transmitted. Evans et al.15’ reported that 100% of
inbred ICR/Ha strain of mice were susceptible to dimethylhydrazine carcinogenesis, whereas the DBA/2
and C57BL/Ha strains were completely resistant to the
same dosage of carcinogen. The susceptible ICR and
resistant C57BL strains were then cross-bred and the
hydrids treated with dimethylhydrazine.Z”5 The yield of
tumors in the hybrids indicated that susceptibility to
the carcinogenic effect of dimethylhydrazine was inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, which is also the
mode of genetic transmission in human familial colonic
polyposis. The mechanism of resistance in these mice
may be related to absence of an enzyme required for the
metabolic activation of dimethylhydrazine, or a genetically transmitted resistance of the colonic mucosa to the
carcinogen.
Nonspecific Injury
The classic experiments of Rous”‘” documented the
promoting effect of nonspecific injury on chemical carcinogenesis. A mechanical insult, such as punching a
hole in the ear of a rabbit previously painted with a
topical carcinogen, caused many tumors to appear in
the region of the healed wound. This effect has been
attributed to the increased cellular proliferation which
accompanies wound healing.““, ‘x’ The tumor-promoting
effect of tissue injury has also been described in animals
treated with dimethylhydrazine. Pozharisski”‘” fashioned a diverticulum in the cecum of rats using a purse
string suture. This produced an area of chronic inflammation around the suture and an increase in epithelial
cell proliferation which lasted for 40 to 50 days after the
operation. The incidence of cecal tumors after dimethylhydrazine was increased approximately 3-fold in the
operated animals compared to nonoperated controls.
Most of the tumors appeared in the area of colonic
inflammation around the suture line. A similar clustering of experimental colon cancers around suture lines
or colostomy stomas has been reported in rats treated
with dimethylhydrazine,“’ dimethylaminobiphenyl,i
MNNG,‘“” and azoxymethane.‘” It is also known that
human colon cancers occur with increased frequency in
colonic suture lines,‘“” at or near the site of ureterosigmoidostomy,‘“’ and in patients with Crohn’s disease’5x
or chronic ulcerative colitis.‘“” A possible unifying hypothesis to explain these observations is that colonic
cell proliferation in these conditions is increased because of chronic injury. Increased proliferation has been documented in the colonic mucosa of patients with long
standing ulcerative colitis. ‘G”
Summary and Comment
Several potent and specific chemical carcinogens produce in laboratory rodents a very accurate animal
model of human colon cancer. A considerable body of
information is available regarding the mechanism of
action of these carcinogens, and the histopathological
evolution of colonic neoplasms in animals. The sequence
of events leading to colon cancer after administration of
dimethylhydrazine can be summarized briefly as follows. Dimethylhydrazine is a procarcinogen which undergoes metabolic activation in the host to the active
carcinogen methyldiazonium, an alkylating agent. This
activation occurs primarily in the liver, and probably in
other tissues as well, but does not require the intestinal
flora because germ-free animals also develop colonic
tumors when given dimethylhydrazine. The activated
carcinogen reaches the colon either by the blood stream
or via the fecal stream. The primary effect of the
carcinogen in the colonic epithelial cell is methylation
of DNA. This is not specific for the colon because
methylation of DNA also occurs in the liver and kidney,
which are not target organs for dimethylhydrazine.
After an initial period of reduced DNA synthesis lasting
up to several days, there is a generalized increase in
cellular proliferation and a widening of the proliferative
zone manifested by the appearance of mitotic figures in
the upper third of the crypt and on the surface epithelium. After 2 to 3 months of treatment there is a
decrease in goblet cells, hyperplasia of glands, and
areas of focal atypia. Microscopic adenocarcinomas and
adenomatous polyps appear between 4 and 6 months
after start:ing treatment, and eventually produce rectal
bleeding or bowel obstruction. The yield of tumors in
this animal model is effected by alteration in dietary
fat, administration of bile salts and cholestyramine,
and nonspecific colonic injury; the mechanism of these
interactions remains unexplained.
How might the study of colon cancer in rats and mice
be useful in our understanding of the pathophysiology
of the disease in humans? The animal model provides
the opport.unity to study the evolution of colon cancer
from the initial damage to epithelial cell DNA in the
target tissue to the development of an invasive adenocarcinoma. This experimental approach is obviously not
feasible in human subjects. It should be possible to
define more carefully the complex alterations of cellular
chemistry which characterize the early malignant cell,
and in this way devise a biochemical test for the early
diagnosis of colon cancer in man. The animal model
likewise provides an excellent test system to further
study the effects of manipulations of the diet, bacterial
flora, or biliary excretions on the incidence of colon
cancer. This may prove extremely useful in unraveling
the complex role of dietary fat, endogenous sterols, and
gut bacteria in tumor formation. Experimental immunotherapy and chemotherapy might also be tested in
rodents with colon cancers before clinical trials in
humans. Although one must exercise great caution in extrapolating the results of animal studies to human
disease, these animal models will hopefully expand our
knowledge of the fundamental biology of colonic neoplasia and ultimately enhance our ability to diagnose and
treat colon cancer in man. 
Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a report from the International Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia updating the National Cancer Institute–Working Group 1996 guidelinesAbstract
Standardized criteria for diagnosis and response assessment are needed to interpret and compare clinical trials and for approval of new therapeutic agents by regulatory agencies. Therefore, a National Cancer Institute–sponsored Working Group (NCI-WG) on chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) published guidelines for the design and conduct of clinical trials for patients with CLL in 1988, which were updated in 1996. During the past decade, considerable progress has been achieved in defining new prognostic markers, diagnostic parameters, and treatment options. This prompted the International Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (IWCLL) to provide updated recommendations for the management of CLL in clinical trials and general practice.Introduction
In 1988 and 1996, a National Cancer Institute–sponsored Working Group (NCI-WG) on chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) published guidelines for the design and conduct of clinical trials for patients with CLL to facilitate comparisons between different treatments and to establish definitions that could be used in scientific studies on the biology of this disease.1,2  The US Food and Drug Administration also adopted these guidelines in their evaluation and approval of new drugs. During the past decade, considerable progress has been made in defining new prognostic markers, diagnostic parameters, and treatment options, prompting the IWCLL-sponsored Working Group to revise the 1996 criteria.

1. Diagnosis of CLL
The World Health Organization classification of hematopoietic neoplasias describes CLL as leukemic, lymphocytic lymphoma, being only distinguishable from small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL) by its leukemic appearance.3  In the World Health Organization classification, CLL is always a disease of neoplastic B cells, whereas the entity formerly described as T-CLL is now called T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia.4 

It is important to verify that the patient has CLL and not some other lymphoproliferative disease that can masquerade as CLL, such as hairy cell leukemia, or leukemic manifestations of mantle cell lymphoma, marginal zone lymphoma, splenic marginal zone lymphoma with circulating villous lymphocytes, or follicular lymphoma. To achieve this, it is essential to evaluate the blood count, blood smear, and the immune phenotype of the circulating lymphoid cells (see sections 1.1 and 1.2).

1.1. Blood
The diagnosis of CLL requires the presence of at least 5 × 109 B lymphocytes/L (5000/μL) in the peripheral blood. The clonality of the circulating B lymphocytes needs to be confirmed by flow cytometry. The leukemia cells found in the blood smear are characteristically small, mature lymphocytes with a narrow border of cytoplasm and a dense nucleus lacking discernible nucleoli and having partially aggregated chromatin. These cells may be found admixed with larger or atypical cells, cleaved cells, or prolymphocytes, which may comprise up to 55% of the blood lymphocytes.5  Finding prolymphocytes in excess of this percentage would favor a diagnosis of prolymphocytic leukemia (B-cell PLL). Gumprecht nuclear shadows, or smudge cells, found as cell debris, are other characteristic morphologic features found in CLL.

CLL or SLL might be suspected in otherwise healthy adults who have an absolute increase in the clonal B lymphocytes but who have less than 5 × 109/L B lymphocytes in the blood. However, in the absence of lymphadenopathy or organomegaly (as defined by physical examination or CT scans), cytopenias, or disease-related symptoms, the presence of fewer than 5 × 109 B lymphocytes per liter of blood is defined as “monoclonal B-lymphocytosis.”6  Monoclonal B-lymphocytosis may progress to frank CLL at a rate of 1% to 2% per year.7 

The definition of SLL requires the presence of lymphadenopathy and/or splenomegaly. Moreover, the number of B lymphocytes in the peripheral blood should not exceed 5 × 109/L. In SLL, the diagnosis should be confirmed by histopathologic evaluation of a lymph node biopsy whenever possible.

1.2. Immunophenotype
CLL cells coexpress the T-cell antigen CD5 and B-cell surface antigens CD19, CD20, and CD23. The levels of surface immunoglobulin, CD20, and CD79b are characteristically low compared with those found on normal B cells.8,9  Each clone of leukemia cells is restricted to expression of either kappa or lambda immunoglobulin light chains.8  Variations of the intensity of expression of these markers may exist and do not prevent inclusion of a patient in clinical trials for CLL.

In contrast, B-cell PLL cells do not express CD5 in half of the cases, and typically express high levels of CD20 and surface Ig.10  In addition, the leukemia cells of mantle cell lymphoma, despite also expressing B-cell surface antigens and CD5, generally do not express CD23.

1.3. Other tests performed at diagnosis
The tests described in this section are not needed to establish the diagnosis of CLL but may help predict the prognosis or to assess the tumor burden. With the exception of molecular genetics fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), the application of these tests should not be used in routine practice to influence therapy and is not generally recommended. However, certain parameters, such as immunoglobulin mutational status, are useful for predicting the clinical course in individual cases. These tests can be recommended for patients who want a better prediction of the rate at which their disease might progress but it should be emphasized that the indication for treatment does not depend on any of these tests but on the clinical stage and the disease activity (see section 4).

1.3.1. Molecular cytogenetics.
Using interphase FISH, cytogenetic lesions can be identified in more than 80% of all CLL cases.11  The most common deletions are in the long arm of chromosome 13 [del(13q14.1)]. Additional frequent chromosomal aberrations include trisomy of chromosome 12, deletions in the long arm of chromosomes 11 [del(11q)] or 6 [del(6q)], or in the short arm of chromosome 17 [del(17p)].11  When stimulated in vitro, CLL cells can have detectable chromosomal translocations, which are of potential prognostic significance.12  Certain translocations can help distinguish other lymphoproliferative diseases from CLL (eg, t(11;14), which generally is found in mantle cell lymphoma).

There is increasing evidence from prospective clinical trials that detection of certain chromosomal deletions has prognostic significance. Patients with leukemia cells that have del(17p) have an inferior prognosis and appear relatively resistant to standard chemotherapy regimens using alkylating drugs and/or purine analogs.13,14  In a retrospective analysis on several chromosomal aberrations detected by FISH, patients who had CLL cells with chromosomal aberrations del(11q) or del(17p) had an inferior outcome compared with patients who had leukemia cells with a normal karyotype or del(13q) as the sole genetic abnormality.11  On the other hand, patients with leukemia cells having del(17p) may respond to therapy with alemtuzumab, either alone or in combination with other antileukemia agents.15,16  Detection of these cytogenetic abnormalities has apparent prognostic value and may influence therapeutic decisions. For clinical trials, it is recommended that cytogenetics be performed before treating a patient on protocol. Additional genetic defects may be acquired during the course of the disease17 ; therefore, the repetition of FISH analyses seems justified before subsequent, second- or third-line treatment.

1.3.2. Mutational status of IgVH, VH3.21 usage, and expression of ZAP-70 or CD38.
The leukemia cells express immunoglobulin that may or may not have incurred somatic mutations in the immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region genes (IgVH genes). The outcome of patients with leukemia cells that use an unmutated IgVH gene is inferior to those patients with leukemia cells that use a mutated IgVH gene.18,19  In addition, the VH3.21 gene usage is an unfavorable prognostic marker independent of the IgVH mutational status.20  Leukemia-cell expression of ZAP-70 or CD38 was found to correlate with the expression of unmutated IgVH genes and to predict a poor prognosis.18,21-27  However, the association between expression of ZAP-70 or CD38 with the expression of unmutated IgVH genes is not absolute. It is uncertain whether leukemia-cell expression of unmutated IgVH genes or ZAP-70 predict the response to treatment or overall survival, once therapy is required.14,28  Taken together, further clinical trials are needed to standardize the assessment of these parameters and to determine whether they should affect the management of patients with CLL.

1.3.3. Serum markers.
Several studies have found that serum markers CD23, thymidine kinase, and β2-microglobulin may predict survival or progression-free survival.29-35  Assays for these markers should be standardized and used in prospective clinical trials to validate their relative value to the management of patients with CLL.

1.3.4. Marrow examination.
In CLL, characteristically more than 30% of the nucleated cells in the aspirate are lymphoid. Although the type of marrow infiltration (diffuse vs nondiffuse) reflects the tumor burden and provides some prognostic information, recent results suggest that the prognostic value of BM biopsy may now be superseded by new prognostic markers.36 

A marrow aspirate and biopsy generally are not required for the diagnosis of CLL. However, a marrow biopsy and aspirate can help evaluate for factors that might contribute to cytopenias (anemia, thrombocytopenia) that may or may not be directly related to leukemia-cell infiltration of the marrow. Because such factors could influence the susceptibility to drug-induced cytopenias, a marrow biopsy is recommended before initiating therapy. It is recommended to repeat a marrow biopsy in patients with persisting cytopenia after treatment to uncover disease- versus therapy-related causes.

2. Clinical staging
There are 2 widely accepted staging methods for use in both patient care and clinical trials: the Rai system37  and the Binet system.38  The original Rai classification was modified to reduce the number of prognostic groups from 5 to 3.39  As such, both systems now describe 3 major subgroups with discrete clinical outcomes. These 2 staging systems are simple, inexpensive, and can be applied by physicians worldwide. Both rely solely on a physical examination and standard laboratory tests and do not require ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance imaging. These 2 systems are outlined in the following 2 sections.

2.1. Rai staging system
The modified Rai classification defines low-risk disease as patients who have lymphocytosis with leukemia cells in the blood and/or marrow (lymphoid cells >30%; formerly considered Rai stage 0). Patients with lymphocytosis, enlarged nodes in any site, and splenomegaly and/or hepatomegaly (lymph nodes being palpable or not) are defined as having intermediate-risk disease (formerly considered Rai stage I or stage II). High-risk disease includes patients with disease-related anemia (as defined by a hemoglobin [Hb] level <110 g/L [11 g/dL]; formerly stage III) or thrombocytopenia (as defined by a platelet count <100 × 109/L; formerly stage IV).

2.2. Binet staging system
Staging is based on the number of involved areas, as defined by the presence of enlarged lymph nodes of greater than 1 cm in diameter or organomegaly, and on whether there is anemia or thrombocytopenia.

Areas of involvement considered for staging
Head and neck, including the Waldeyer ring (this counts as one area, even if more than one group of nodes is enlarged).

Axillae (involvement of both axillae counts as one area).

Groins, including superficial femorals (involvement of both groins counts as one area).

Palpable spleen.

Palpable liver (clinically enlarged).

Stage A.
Hb 100 g/L (10 g/dL) or more and platelets 100 × 109/L or more and up to 2 of the above involved.

Stage B.
Hb 100 g/L (10 g/dL) or more and platelets 100 × 109/L or more and organomegaly greater than that defined for stage A (ie, 3 or more areas of nodal or organ enlargement).

Stage C.
All patients who have Hb less than 100 g/L (10 g/dL) and/or a platelet count less than 100 × 109/L, irrespective of organomegaly.

3. Eligibility criteria for clinical trials
The selection of CLL patients for clinical trials is similar to that for patients with other malignancies. Phase 1 or 2 clinical trials commonly, although not invariably, are intended for patients who have had prior therapy. It may be worth considering the inclusion of patients with SLL in some phase 1 or 2 trials exploring new agents in CLL. However, for SLL the response assessment should be done according to the lymphoma guidelines. The combination of new agents with standard therapy as part of phase 2 studies may be investigated in both untreated and previously treated patients. Phase 3 clinical trials are used to compare the clinical outcome using new treatment modalities with that using current standard therapy. Other requirements for eligibility with respect to age, clinical stage, performance status, organ function, or status of disease activity should be defined for each study.

3.1. Performance status and fitness
Before inclusion in a trial, the performance status as defined by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) should be 0 to 3. Future clinical trials involving elderly patients ideally should assess the comorbidity (fitness) and/or functional activity of patients (eg, such as that defined by “cumulative illness rating scale” or the “Charlson” score).40,41 

3.2. Organ function eligibility for clinical trials
Most chemotherapy agents have potential toxicity for the liver, kidneys, heart, lungs, nervous system, or other organ systems. Therefore, organ function requirements should be guided by the known or suspected toxicity of each agent based on preclinical studies or prior clinical studies. Patients enrolled on protocols evaluating agents with known or suspected toxicity for a given organ(s) should have documented the specific organ function before therapy.

3.3. Infectious disease status
The status of specific infectious diseases as outlined in section 3.5 should be documented. Patients with active infections requiring systemic antibiotics or antifungal or antiviral drugs should have their infection resolved before initiating therapy in a clinical trial.

3.4. Second malignancies
Patients with a second malignancy, other than basal cell carcinoma of the skin or in situ carcinoma of the cervix or the breast, generally are not considered candidates for entry into clinical trials unless the tumor was successfully treated with curative intent at least 2 years before trial entry.

3.5. Required pretreatment evaluation
Parameters considered necessary for a complete pretreatment evaluation may differ depending on whether or not the patient is treated in a clinical protocol. Therefore, a clear distinction is made in sections 3.5 and 5 between recommendations for general practice and the requirements for clinical trials (Tables 1,Table 2–3). If not indicated otherwise, recommendations are identical for clinical trials and general practice. In general, studies for defining these parameters should be performed within 2 weeks of clinical trial enrollment (except for marrow aspirate and biopsy and CT scans; see sections 3.5.1 and 3.5.1.2).

3.5.1. Essential pretreatment tests
3.5.1.1. Physical examination.
The bidimensional diameters of the largest palpable lymph nodes in each of the following sites should be recorded: cervical, axillary, supraclavicular, inguinal, and femoral (Table 1). The size of the liver and spleen, as assessed by palpation, should also be recorded.3.5.1.3. A complete blood cell count.
White blood cell count, hemoglobin and hematocrit, platelet count, and differential count, including both percent and absolute number of lymphocytes, and reticulocyte count should be performed. Reporting the proportion of prolymphocytes is desirable when these are present.

3.5.1.4. Marrow biopsy.
Before initiating treatment in a clinical trial with potentially myelosuppressive agents, patients should undergo a unilateral marrow aspirate and biopsy. Repeat marrow biopsies may be compared with the pretreatment marrow specimen.

3.5.1.5. Serum chemistry.
For example, creatinine, bilirubin, lactic dehydrogenase, transaminases, alkaline phosphatase.

3.5.1.6. Serum immunoglobulin levels.
3.5.1.7. Direct antiglobulin test.
3.5.1.8. Chest radiograph (when a CT scan is not performed).
3.5.1.9. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
Patients who are infected with HIV should be given special consideration because of the potential risks for immune suppression with most antileukemia therapies and the potential for compounded myelotoxicity of treatment with antiretroviral therapy.

3.5.1.10. Cytomegalovirus (CMV).
Therapies associated with the potential for reactivation of infection with CMV, such as alemtuzumab or allogeneic stem cell transplantation, should include plans for monitoring for active CMV disease and/or for providing anti-CMV therapy.42  These should cover screening or early diagnosis of CMV reactivation and its subsequent management. However, a positive CMV serology does not represent a contraindication for alemtuzumab treatment or allogeneic stem cell transplantation. As a general recommendation for patients treated with alemtuzumab, close monitoring and/or therapy for active CMV disease should be considered for patients found to have evidence for increased levels of CMV in the blood by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), even in the absence of clinical symptoms. In addition, evaluation and therapy for CMV is recommended for any patient with clinical symptoms of active CMV infection.

3.5.1.11. Hepatitis B and hepatitis C.
Before initiating treatment, the evaluation for infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) is recommended because reactivation of HBV and HCV infections may occur under therapy with immunosuppressive or myelosuppressive drugs. Chronic HBV carriers as defined by positive surface antigen undergoing chemotherapy should receive prophylactic therapy with nucleoside analogs, such as lamivudine to prevent HBV reactivation.43,44 

3.5.2. Additional pretreatment tests (Table 1) may be performed in clinical trials or in the presence of specific clinical problems.
3.5.2.1. The assessment of molecular cytogenetics (FISH) before therapy is recommended.
3.5.2.2. CT scans generally are not required for the initial evaluation or follow-up.
Moreover, the staging of CLL does not use CT scans but relies on physical examination and blood counts. Results of a recent study suggest that the presence of abdominal disease (splenomegaly or lymphadenopathy) as detected by CT scan in patients with Rai stage 0 predicts a more aggressive clinical course.45  Therefore, clinical studies evaluating the use of CT scans in CLL are strongly encouraged. Moreover, enlarged lymph nodes if detected only by CT scan do not change the clinical Binet or Rai stage.

In clinical trials, in which the treatment intent is to maximize complete remission (CR), chest, abdominal, and pelvic CT scans are recommended to evaluate the response to therapy. One CT scan should be performed before the start of therapy and another CT scan at the first restaging after therapy if previously abnormal.

3.5.2.3. Other imaging methods.
Except in patients with Richter transformation, positron emission tomography scans do not provide information that is useful in the management of CLL. Similarly, nuclear magnetic resonance imaging and other imaging techniques are generally not useful in the management of CLL.

3.5.2.4. Abdominal ultrasound.
In some countries, the use of abdominal ultrasound is popular to assess the extent of lymphadenopathy and organomegaly in CLL. Although it may be used in the clinical management of individual patients, this methodology is strongly investigator-dependent and therefore should not be used for the response evaluation in clinical trials.

3.5.2.5. Lymph node biopsy.
A lymph node biopsy is generally not required, unless such tissue is necessary for companion scientific studies or in rare cases with difficult diagnosis. A lymph node biopsy is required to establish the diagnosis of a transformation into an aggressive lymphoma (Richter syndrome).

4. Indications for treatment
4.1. Primary treatment decisions
Criteria for initiating treatment may vary depending on whether or not the patient is treated in a clinical trial (Table 2). In general practice, newly diagnosed patients with asymptomatic early-stage disease (Rai 0, Binet A) should be monitored without therapy unless they have evidence of disease progression. Studies from the French Cooperative Group on CLL,46  the Cancer and Leukemia Group B,47  the Spanish Group PETHEMA,48  and the Medical Research Council48  in the United Kingdom in patients with early-stage disease confirm that the use of alkylating agents in patients with early-stage disease does not prolong survival. This result was confirmed by a meta-analysis.49  In one study, treated patients with early-stage disease had an increased frequency of fatal epithelial cancers compared with untreated patients.46  Therefore, the potential benefit, if any, of an early intervention therapy with antileukemia drugs, alone or in combination with monoclonal antibodies, requires further study.Whereas patients at intermediate (stages I and II) and high risk (stages III and IV) according to the modified Rai classification or at Binet stage B or C usually benefit from the initiation of treatment, some of these patients (in particular Rai intermediate risk or Binet stage B) can be monitored without therapy until they have evidence for progressive or symptomatic disease.

Active disease should be clearly documented for protocol therapy. At least one of the following criteria should be met:

Evidence of progressive marrow failure as manifested by the development of, or worsening of, anemia and/or thrombocytopenia

Massive (ie, at least 6 cm below the left costal margin) or progressive or symptomatic splenomegaly

Massive nodes (ie, at least 10 cm in longest diameter) or progressive or symptomatic lymphadenopathy

Progressive lymphocytosis with an increase of more than 50% over a 2-month period or lymphocyte doubling time (LDT) of less than 6 months. LDT can be obtained by linear regression extrapolation of absolute lymphocyte counts obtained at intervals of 2 weeks over an observation period of 2 to 3 months. In patients with initial blood lymphocyte counts of less than 30 × 109/L (30 000/μL), LDT should not be used as a single parameter to define a treatment indication. In addition, factors contributing to lymphocytosis or lymphadenopathy other than CLL (eg, infections) should be excluded.

Autoimmune anemia and/or thrombocytopenia that is poorly responsive to corticosteroids or other standard therapy (see section 10.2).

Constitutional symptoms, defined as any one or more of the following disease-related symptoms or signs:

Unintentional weight loss of 10% or more within the previous 6 months;

significant fatigue (ie, ECOG PS 2 or worse; inability to work or perform usual activities);

fevers higher than 100.5°F or 38.0°C for 2 or more weeks without other evidence of infection; or

night sweats for more than 1 month without evidence of infection.

Hypogammaglobulinemia or monoclonal or oligoclonal paraproteinemia does not by itself constitute a basis for initiating therapy. However, it is recommended to assess the change of these protein abnormalities if patients are treated.

Patients with CLL may present with a markedly elevated leukocyte count; however, the symptoms associated with leukocyte aggregates that develop in patients with acute leukemia rarely occur in patients with CLL. Therefore, the absolute lymphocyte count should not be used as the sole indicator for treatment.

4.2. Second-line treatment decisions
In general, second-line treatment decisions follow the same indications as those used for initiation of first-line treatment. Patients who have resistant disease, a short time to progression after the first treatment, and/or leukemia cells with del(17p) often do not respond to standard chemotherapy and have a relatively short survival. Therefore, such patients should be offered investigative clinical protocols, including allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.50-54 

5. Definition of response, relapse, and refractory disease
Assessment of response should include a careful physical examination and evaluation of the blood and marrow (Tables 3,4).

5.1. Complete remission (CR)
CR requires all of the following criteria as assessed at least 2 months after completion of therapy:

5.1.1. Peripheral blood lymphocytes (evaluated by blood and differential count) below 4 × 109/L (4000/μL).
In clinical trials, the presence of minimal residual disease (MRD) after therapy should be assessed (see section 5.9). The sensitivity of the method used to evaluate for MRD should be reported.

5.1.2. Absence of significant lymphadenopathy (eg, lymph nodes >1.5 cm in diameter) by physical examination.
In clinical trials, a CT scan of the abdomen, pelvis, and thorax is desirable if previously abnormal. Lymph nodes should not be larger than 1.5 cm in diameter.

5.1.3. No hepatomegaly or splenomegaly by physical examination.
In clinical trials, a CT scan of the abdomen should be performed at response assessment if found to be abnormal before therapy or if physical examination is inconclusive at the time of evaluation.

5.1.4. Absence of constitutional symptoms.
5.1.5. Blood counts above the following values:
5.1.5.1. Neutrophils more than 1.5 × 109/L (1500/μL) without need for exogenous growth factors.
5.1.5.2. Platelets more than 100 × 109/L (100 000/μL) without need for exogenous growth factors.
5.1.5.3. Hemoglobin more than 110 g/L (11.0 g/dL) without red blood cell transfusion or need for exogenous erythropoietin.
5.1.6. For patients in clinical trials (Table 3), a marrow aspirate and biopsy should be performed at least 2 months after the last treatment and if clinical and laboratory results listed in sections 5.1.1 through 5.1.5 demonstrate that a CR has been achieved.To define a CR, the marrow sample must be at least normocellular for age, with less than 30% of nucleated cells being lymphocytes. Lymphoid nodules should be absent.

In some cases, lymphoid nodules can be found, which often reflect residual disease.55,56  These nodules should be recorded as “nodular PR.” Moreover, immunohistochemistry should be performed to define whether these nodules are composed primarily of T cells or lymphocytes other than CLL cells or of CLL cells. If the marrow is hypocellular, a repeat determination should be performed after 4 weeks, or until peripheral blood counts have recovered. However, this time interval should not exceed 6 months after the last treatment. A marrow biopsy should be compared with that of pretreatment marrow. In general practice, the use of a marrow biopsy for evaluating a CR is at the discretion of the physician.

In clinical trials aiming at maximizing the CR rate, the quality of the CR should be assessed for MRD by flow cytometry (see section 5.9) or by immunohistochemistry (IHC).

5.1.7. A controversial issue is how best to categorize the response of patients who fulfill all the criteria for a CR (including the marrow examinations described in section 5.16) but who have a persistent anemia or thrombocytopenia or neutropenia apparently unrelated to CLL but related to drug toxicity.
We recommend that these patients be considered as a different category of remission: CR with incomplete marrow recovery (CRi). For the definition of this category, CRi, the marrow evaluation (see section 5.1.6) should be performed with scrutiny and not show any clonal infiltrate. In clinical trials, CRi patients should be monitored prospectively to determine whether their outcome differs from that of patients with detectable residual disease or with noncytopenic CR.

5.2. Partial remission (PR)
PR is defined by the criteria described in sections 5.2.1, 5.2.2, or 5.2.3 (if abnormal before therapy), as well as one or more of the features listed in section 5.2.4. To define a PR, these parameters need to be documented for a minimal duration of 2 months (Table 4). Constitutional symptoms persisting for more than 1 month should be recorded.5.2.1. A decrease in the number of blood lymphocytes by 50% or more from the value before therapy.
5.2.2. Reduction in lymphadenopathy (by CT scans in clinical trials57  or by palpation in general practice) as defined by the following:
5.2.2.1. A decrease in lymph node size by 50% or more either in the sum products of up to 6 lymph nodes, or in the largest diameter of the enlarged lymph node(s) detected prior to therapy.
5.2.2.2. No increase in any lymph node, and no new enlarged lymph node. In small lymph nodes (< 2 cm), an increase of less than 25% is not considered to be significant.
5.2.3. A reduction in the noted pretreatment enlargement of the spleen or liver by 50% or more, as detected by CT scan (in clinical trials) or palpation (in general practice).
5.2.4. The blood count should show one of the following results:
5.2.4.1. Neutrophils more than 1.5 × 109/L (1500/μL) without need for exogenous growth factors.
5.2.4.2. Platelet counts greater than 100 × 109/L (100 000/μL) or 50% improvement over baseline without need for exogenous growth factors.
5.2.4.3. Hemoglobin greater than 110 g/L (11.0 g/dL) or 50% improvement over baseline without requiring red blood cell transfusions or exogenous erythropoietin.
5.3. Progressive disease
Progressive disease during or after therapy is characterized by at least one of the following:

5.3.1. Lymphadenopathy.
Progression of lymphadenopathy is often discovered by physical examination and should be recorded. In CLL, the use of CT scans usually does not add much information for the detection of progression or relapse.58  Therefore, the use of imaging methods to follow CLL progression is at the discretion of the treating physician. Disease progression occurs if one of the following events is observed:

Appearance of any new lesion, such as enlarged lymph nodes (>1.5 cm), splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, or other organ infiltrates.

An increase by 50% or more in greatest determined diameter of any previous site.

5.3.2. An increase in the previously noted enlargement of the liver or spleen by 50% or more or the de novo appearance of hepatomegaly or splenomegaly.
5.3.3. An increase in the number of blood lymphocytes by 50% or more with at least 5000 B lymphocytes per microliter.
5.3.4. Transformation to a more aggressive histology (eg, Richter syndrome). Whenever possible, this diagnosis should be established by lymph node biopsy.
5.3.5. Occurrence of cytopenia (neutropenia, anemia, or thrombocytopenia) attributable to CLL.
5.3.5.1. During therapy.
Cytopenias may occur as a side effect of many therapies and should be assessed according to Table 5. During therapy, cytopenias cannot be used to define disease progression. Each protocol should define the amount of drug(s) to be administered with such cytopenias.5.3.5.2. After treatment.
The progression of any cytopenia (unrelated to autoimmune cytopenia), as documented by a decrease of Hb levels by more than 20 g/L (2 g/dL) or to less than 100 g/L (10 g/dL), or by a decrease of platelet counts by more than 50% or to less than 100 × 109/L (100 000/μL), which occurs at least 3 months after treatment, defines disease progression, if the marrow biopsy demonstrates an infiltrate of clonal CLL cells.

5.4. Stable disease
Patients who have not achieved a CR or a PR, and who have not exhibited progressive disease, will be considered to have stable disease (which is equivalent to a nonresponse).

5.5. Treatment failure
Responses that should be considered clinically beneficial include CR and PR; all others (eg, stable disease, nonresponse, progressive disease, or death from any cause) should be rated as a treatment failure.

5.6. Time to progression, progression-free survival, and overall survival
Time to progression (TTP) is defined as the time from study entry until objective disease progression (see section 5.3). Progression-free survival (PFS) is defined as the time from study entry until objective disease progression or death. Overall survival is defined as the time from study entry until death from any cause, and is measured in the intent-to-treat population.

5.7. Relapse
Relapse is defined as a patient who has previously achieved the above criteria (sections 5.1 and 5.2) of a CR or PR, but after a period of 6 or more months, demonstrates evidence of disease progression (see section 5.3).

5.8. Refractory disease
Refractory disease is defined as treatment failure (as defined in section 5.5) or disease progression within 6 months to the last antileukemic therapy. For the definition of “high-risk CLL” justifying the use of allogeneic stem cell transplantation,59  the disease should be refractory to a purine analog-based therapy or to autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

5.9. Minimal residual disease
The complete eradication of the leukemia is an obvious desired endpoint. New detection technologies, such as multicolor flow cytometry and real-time quantitative PCR, have determined that many patients who achieved a CR by the 1996 NCI-WG guidelines have detectable MRD. Although eradication of MRD may improve prognosis, prospective clinical trials are needed to define whether additional treatment intended solely to eradicate MRD provides a significant benefit to clinical outcome. The techniques for assessing MRD have undergone a critical evaluation and have become fairly standard.60  Either 4-color flow cytometry (MRD flow) or allele-specific oligonucleotide PCR is reliably sensitive down to a level of approximately one CLL cell in 10 000 leukocytes. As such, patients will be defined as having a clinical remission in the absence of MRD when they have blood or marrow with less than one CLL cell per 10 000 leukocytes. The blood generally can be used for making this assessment except during the period within 3 months of completing therapy, particularly for patients treated with alemtuzumab, rituximab, and other antibodies targeting CLL. In such cases, it is essential to assess the marrow for MRD. Therefore, future clinical trials that aim toward achieving long-lasting CRs should include at least one test to assess MRD because the lack of leukemia persistence using these sensitive tests seems to have a strong, positive prognostic impact.61-63 

6. Factors requiring stratification at inclusion in a clinical phase 3 trial
6.1. Patients ideally should be stratified with regard to previous treatment versus no previous treatment, and as purine analog–sensitive versus purine analog–refractory in studies for which prior therapy is allowed.

6.2. If more than one clinical stage is allowed, patients ideally should be stratified for stage.

6.3. Patients ideally should be stratified based on whether or not they have leukemia cells with del(17p) or del(11q).

7. Assessment of toxicity
Evaluation of treatment-related toxicity requires careful consideration of both the manifestations of the underlying disease and the anticipated adverse reactions to the agents used in therapy. For this reason, some of the conventional criteria used for assessing toxicity are not applicable to clinical studies involving patients with hematologic malignancies in general, or CLL in particular. An example is hematologic toxicity; patients with advanced CLL generally have cytopenias that may be caused by the underlying CLL and/or prior therapy. A few guidelines are presented to help evaluate for treatment-induced toxicity in CLL.

7.1. Hematologic toxicity
Evaluation of hematologic toxicity in patients with CLL must take into consideration that many patients have low blood cell counts at the initiation of therapy. Therefore, the standard criteria used for solid tumors cannot be applied, as many CLL patients then would be considered to have grade 2 to 4 hematologic toxicity at the initiation of treatment. Furthermore, the absolute blood neutrophil counts rarely are used at the initiation of therapy to modify the treatment dose because these values typically are unreliable in CLL patients with lymphocytosis. However, the increasing use of more effective therapeutic agents, particularly those with neutropenia as a dose-limiting toxicity (eg, nucleoside analogs), can result in clinically significant myelosuppression. Therefore, the 1996 guidelines proposed a new dose-modification scheme for quantifying hematologic deterioration in patients with CLL, which included alterations in the dose of myelosuppressive agents based on the absolute neutrophil count. This dose modification scheme has proven very helpful in the context of several large prospective trials in CLL and should be retained (Table 5).

7.2. Infectious complications
Patients with CLL are at increased risk for infection because of compromised immune function, which might be related to the disease itself and/or to the consequences of therapy. Nevertheless, the rate(s) of infection after treatment can be used in assessing the relative immune-suppressive effects of a given therapy. The etiology of the infection should be reported and categorized as bacterial, viral, or fungal, and as proven or probable. The severity of infections should be quantified as minor (requiring either oral antimicrobial therapy or symptomatic care alone), major (requiring hospitalization and systemic antimicrobial therapy), or fatal (death as a result of the infection).

Particular attention should be given to monitoring for symptoms or laboratory evidence of infection with CMV in patients treated with agents, such as alemtuzumab (alone or in combination) or with allogeneic stem cell transplantation. In contrast, the infection rate seems low in patients younger than 65 years treated with fludarabine-based first-line therapy, where no routine anti-infective prophylaxis is required.64 

7.3. Tumor lysis syndrome
CLL patients rarely experience tumor lysis syndrome after therapy with a purine analog-based regimen.65  However, this might not be the case after treatment with newer agents or novel treatment modalities. For this reason, patients in early-phase clinical trials should be monitored for possible tumor lysis syndrome, which should be treated appropriately. If observed, the occurrence and severity of tumor lysis syndrome should be recorded in clinical trials.

7.4. Nonhematologic toxicities
Other nonhematologic toxicities should be graded according to the latest version of the NCI Common Toxicity Criteria.66 

8. Reporting of clinical response data
Clear and careful reporting of data are an essential part of any clinical trial. In clinical studies involving previously treated patients, patients who are relapsed or refractory should be clearly distinguished. Relapse and refractory disease are defined in sections 5.7 and 5.8. For those patients who have relapsed, it is also useful to describe the quality and duration of their prior response.

9. Treatment endpoints
Given the recent increase of treatment options for CLL patients, the choice of treatment and the end points of clinical trials may depend on the fitness of the patients (see section 3.1). For example, the number of MRD-negative CRs or the overall survival might be appropriate end points in physically fit patients. In contrast, trials on patients with reduced physical fitness might choose the time to progression or health-related quality of life as trial end points. Moreover, recent data suggest that the quality of life in CLL patients is reduced compared with the normal population and only moderately increased by some of the current treatment options.67-70  Therefore, further studies assessing the health-related quality of life in CLL are strongly encouraged.

10. Supportive care and management of complications
10.1. Indications for growth factors in CLL
While under myelosuppressive (chemo-)therapy, growth factors, such as G-CSF, should be given according to the guidelines of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.71  The use of G-CSF also might benefit patients who experience prolonged cytopenias after treatment with alemtuzumab. Similarly, some CLL patients with anemia may benefit from erythropoiesis stimulating factors if used according to recently published guidelines.72,73  However, it should be pointed out that CLL-related cytopenias are often efficiently corrected by an appropriate antileukemic therapy.

10.2. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia or autoimmune thrombocytopenia
Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) as a single abnormality caused by CLL initially should be treated with glucocorticoids and not chemotherapy. Second-line treatment options for AIHA include splenectomy, intravenous immunoglobulins, and/or immunosuppressive therapy with agents, such as cyclosporine A, azathioprine, or low-dose cyclophosphamide. Good responses also have been obtained with antibody therapy using agents as rituximab or alemtuzumab.74-76  Treatment refractory autoimmune cytopenias can be an indication for chemotherapy or chemoimmunotherapy directed at the underlying CLL.77  In this regard, the Binet or Rai staging systems do not distinguish between ITP/AIHA or marrow infiltration as the cause for anemia or thrombocytopenia that results in classifying a patient as having stage C or high-risk disease.

The online version of this article contains a data supplement.
This is a new version, updated and corrected, as of December 8, 2008.
Note added in proof:
Due to feedback that the authors have received from readers of the prepublished online version of this article, the authors have added several clarifications, in particular to section 5.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank the following colleagues for reading and commenting on the current version of the guidelines: Drs Francesc Bosch (Barcelona, Spain), John Byrd (Columbus, OH), Barbara Eichhorst (Cologne, Germany), Terry Hamblin (London, United Kingdom), Neil Kay (Rochester, MN), Eva Kimby (Stockholm, Sweden), Estella Matutes (London, United Kingdom), Stefano Molica (Catanzaro, Italy), Stephen Mulligan (Sydney, Australia), Susan O'Brien (Houston, TX), David Oscier (Bournemouth, United Kingdom), and John Seymour (Melbourne, Australia). The authors also thank the following colleagues for their active participation in the original version of the guidelines: Charles A. Schiffer, Martin M. Oken, David H. Boldt, Sanford J. Kempin, and Kenneth A. Foon. The authors also thank the following colleagues for their active participation of the second, 1996 version of the guidelines: John M. Bennett, Michael Grever, Neil Kay, and Susan O'Brien.

This work was supported in part by the Competence Network Malignant Lymphoma of the German Ministry for Education and Research, German Cancer Aid (Deutsche Krebshilfe; M.H.); the European Leukemia Network (European Research Initiative on CLL [ERIC]; M.H., H.D.); by the National Institutes of Health (grant PO1-CA081534), the CLL Research Consortium, and the Arbib Foundation (D.C.); by the Karches Family Foundation, Prince Family Foundation, and the Nash Family Foundation (K.R.R.); and by Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC; F.C.-C.).

National Institutes of Health

Authorship
Contribution: M.H., B.D.C., D.C., F.C.-C., G.D., H.D., P.H., M.J.K., E.M., K.R.R., and T.J.K. all wrote the paper.

A complete list of the International Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia is provided on the Blood website; see the Supplemental Materials link at the top of the online article.THE INCREASING INCIDENCE OF CENTRAL
NERVOUS SYSTEM LEUKEMIA IN CHILDREN The incidence of symptomatic CNS leukemia was studied in 209 children, all
of whom were entered in a cooperative study during 1963-1964, and received
the same chemotherapeutic agents. The overall incidence was 51%, and the
median time for occurrence of the first episode was 9 months. The incidence
was 56% in patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia (A.L.L.) and 25%
in those with other forms of leukemia. CNS symptoms developed at a steady
monthly rate of 3.8% for the first 24 months and then decreased to 2%. The
rate for the first year was the same for all forms of leukemia: it was 4% in
A.L.L. and 3.7% in the other forms combined. The overall median survival
was 18 months-it was 21 months for patients with A.L.L. and 9 months for the
other cell types. Life-table analysis showed a median survival of 8 months for
patients who had developed CNS leukemia and 24 months for those free of the
complication. Age, sex, hematologic status, and chemotherapy regimen did
not influence the incidence. We conclude that the increasing survival of children with leukemia is the chief cause for the increased incidence of CNS
leukemia noted by many investigators.IS KNOWN THAT LEUKEMIA AFFECTS THE I central nervous system (CNS) most often
by the infiltration of the meninges with leukemic cells. The resulting clinical syndrome
of increased intracranial pressure was fully
defined, in 1957, by Gilbert and Rice,% Wells
and Silver,lO and Sullivan.9 Subsequently,
numerous authors have noted an increasing
incidence of as much as 30-40%.3~8 Yet, to
date, a true evaluation of incidence, morbidity, and therapeutic possibilities has not
been available. Either the previous studies
dealt with a relatively small number of patients or they encompassed patients collected
over a long period of time when many developments in therapeutic regimens took
place. Early recognition of this complication,
increasing duration of survival, and type of
treatment given may all influence the rate
of occurrence. The following analysis of 209 children with acute leukemia, entered into
a cooperative study conducted by Children’s
Cancer Study Group A** during a period
of one year, provides some insight into the
factors which influence the incidence of
CNS infiltration.
PATIENT SELECTION
A total of 224 children, 14 years or under,
with all types of acute leukemia were studied between November 1, 1963 and November 15, 1964. 411 episodes of central nervous
system (CNS) leukemia were suspected because of signs or symptoms of increased intracranial pressure. The diagnosis was confirmed by examination of the spinal fluid.
The protocol did not require routine lumbar punctures on asymptomatic children
(v.i.). Patients with symptomatology resulting from intracranial hemorrhage (an allied
but different complication) are excluded
from this analysis.
The study design and results of treatment
have already been reportedfi and are summarized as follows:
All patients entered into the study were newly
diagnosed and had received no treatment.
The initial therapy was prednisone plus either methotrexate* (MTX) or 6-mercaptopurine
(6-MP). Patients in remission 42 days thereafter were again randomized into a cyclic or
sequentiaI group, a11 receiving the same 5
agents, viz., MTX, 6-MP, vincristine (VCR),?
cyclophosphamide (CTX) , and prednisone.
The patients on the cyclic regimen changed
drugs every 6 weeks. When the patient became resistant to all agents, he went off study,
but most continued to receive other agents
under the guidance of the same investigators.
The post study phase of the disease in each
patient is, therefore, included in the evaluation of CNS leukemia.
The study design allowed treatment of
CNS manifestations by either intrathecal
methotrexate or radiation therapy, and no
attempt has been made to evaluate the relative merits of the treatments used. The criteria for evaluation of the patients’ hematologic status are those customary in studies of
this kind.1
STATISTICAL METHODS OF ANALYSIS
Special techniques are necessary in order
to analyze data of this type. One of the problems that arise, from the statistical standpoint, is that there is a changing number of
patients who can develop CNS disease for
the first time. Since patients are continually
dying, it is difficult to study what effect the
duration of the leukemic state has on the
risk of developing the complication. Also,
the comparison of the survival experience
of those who do and do not develop CNS
manifestations is difficult because the likelihood of developing CNS leukemia depends,
in part, on the length of time a patient lives.
And, there are a few patients who were lost
to follow-up at some time during their course
of treatment. All these problems can be
handled by a life-table method which is defor the last time, information about the
CNS status was known on all surviving patients. Fifteen patients were not suitable
for analysis because 4 were lost to follow-up
and 11 were eliminated from study because
of deviations from protocol requirements.
The 209 patients ranged in age from 2
months to 14 years at the time of diagnosis.
The majority were between 1 and 7, with
the peak at 3 years; 111 were boys. Acute
lymphocytic and undifferentiated leukemia
was diagnosed in 173 (82’%), acute granulocytic or monomyelogenous leukemia in 32,
and erythroleukemia in 4.
CNS leukemia occurred in 106 of 209 patients (51%), Fig. l. Episodes were considered to be separate when symptoms cleared
for more than one month following treatment. The total number of episodes was in
excess of 280, with a mean of 2.6 per child
and a range of 1-14. The age range of the
children developing this complication was
the same as that of the overall group and
the peak incidence similarly was in children
aged 3. Of the 106 patients developing CNS
leukemia, 60 were boys; 97/173 had lymphocytic or undifferentiated leukemia, and 9/36
had other forms. Fifty-three patients were on
the cyclic regimen, 52 on the sequential, and
one (who died during induction) was on
neither regimen.
CNS symptoms or signs first occurred at
times ranging from the date of original
diagnosis to 46 months thereafter; the median
time was 9 months (Fig. 1).
The total number of patients contributed
by each institution ranged from 6 to 34. The
incidence of CNS leukemia by institution
varied from 24% to 100%. These values are
not significantly different from the mean tients surviving each month and the percentage of those who have not yet developed
meningeal leukemia. It can be seen that half
of the patients survive 18 months and, from
24 months onward, approximately half oE
the remaining patients have developed at
least one episode of CNS leukemia. The
lower part of the graph shows, for each
month of survival, the percentage of patients
still at risk who first develop CNS leukemia.
The rate for the first 24 months is 3.S% p!r
month; for the second 2 years, the rate is
2% per month. The highest incidence was
3/34 patients or 8.80/, occurring at month
29.
Essentially, the same number of episodes
occurred in both treatment groups: there was
a total of 148 episodes in the patients on the
cyclic regimen and 131 episodes in those on
sequential therapy. Initial and subsequent
attacks of meningeal leukemia occurred on
all 5 agents, including prednisone. In 46 episodes in the sequential group, where the patients' hematologic status was recorded, 26
episodes (56%) occurred during remission.
Although the incidence of CNS symptoms
was greater in those children with lymphocytic leukemia than in those with other forms
of the disease, the monthly rate was the same
for all types. Fifty-six percent of patients
with lymphocytic and 25y0 with myeloid,
monocytic, or erythroleukemia developed
CNS disease; the rate for the former was
4% and for the latter 3.7% per month for
the first 12 months. The survival time of
this group was approximately half that of
the patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia
(v.i.).
The median survival of 209 patients was
18 months; the range was from less than
one month to greater than 48 months (Fig.
2). At preparation of this report, 26 patients
had survived for 48 months and 12 had not
yet developed CNS symptoms. Patients with
lymphocytic leukemia survived a median of
21 months and those with nonlymphocytic
morphology, 8.5 months. The median
survival of all patients developing CNS complications was 21 months; it was 13 months
for those who did not develop CNS leukemia. The median survival from the first
episode of CNS leukemia to death was 7.5
months-the mean was 11 months and the
range was from less than one to 46 months.
The development of CNS leukemia is related to patient survival. Therefore, a life- table type analysis was used to calculate the
probability of developing the complication
The method employed permitted analysis of
the date for any time period without reference
to the number of patients who had died previously. Figure 3 depicts the monthly cumulative incidence of CNS leukemia arrived
at by life-table analysis plotted on a similog scale. It can be predicted that 50% of
patients who survive 18 months and 75%
of the patients who survive 4 years will have
developed CNS symptoms by that time. It
can be seen from this figure that, apart from
an initial lag, the rate appears fairly constant
for approximately 24 months when it decreases. Averaged in 2-year blocks, the 3.8%
incidence in the first 2 years is approximately
twice that of the second 2-year period (2.0%).
The crude survival data includes the bias
that the longer a patient with leukemia lives,
the greater the chance he will develop a
CNS complication. In order to evaluate the
effect of CNS leukemia on survival, life-table
analysis of the data was used to calculate
2 hypothetical survival curves-one for patients developing CNS disease and another
for those who do not. These 2 curves are
presented in Fig. 4. It can be seen that the
trend obtained by analysis of the crude data
is reversed. In this prediction, patients who
do not develop CNS disease should live a
median of 24 months and those who do develop disease, a median of 8 months.
DISCUSSION
Is the reported increasing incidence of
CNS leukemia due to a prolongation of survival, is it because the complication is being
recognized more often, or is it a consequence
of the new drugs being employed?
In nearly 1,000 patients diagnosed between
1948 and 1960, the incidence of CNS leukemia increased from 3-400/,, and the median
survival rose from 4-12 months.3 This suggests that increased survival does influence
the incidence of CNS infiltration. Hyman
et al. noted CNS symptoms were uncommon
in the first 3 months when the incidence rose
sharply with a median at 7 months after
diagnosis.6 Hardisty reported a group of 29
patients who developed CNS leukemia between 2 and 41 months after the time of
diagnosis. His data suggested a fairly steady
rate of incidence during the course of disease.5 Nies comnares 2 groups of Datients diagnosed between 1953 and 1958 and between 1961 and 1963; the median survival
for the former was 9 months and for the
latter, 13 months.8 The incidence of symptomatic CNS disease was not different in
the 2 groups, but diagnosis of the complication was more frequent in the second period
because routine lumbar punctures were done
and abnormalities detected in asymptomatic
patients. Examination of the CSF was not
done routinely in the first series, Thus, increased awareness is no doubt contributing
to the higher incidence figures being reported. 
Most chemical agents used in the treatment of leukemia appear in the spinal fluid
in insignificant concentrations. This is true
also for the 2 agents introduced more recently: cyclophosphamide and vincristine.
Therefore, the longer hematologic control
made possible by the newer drugs has not
led to control of the disease in the meninges.
The records reviewed in the present study
had 2 advantages in helping to answer some
of the questions raised above: 1. they belonged to a large number of children placed
on study during a relatively short time period, and 2. all received the same chemotherapy. Even the children who completed
the original treatment protocol and survived
for a significant period of time thereafter
were treated in a comparable fashion, the
majority receiving cytosine arabinoside and
daunomycin.
Fifty-one percent of all patients developed
CNS complications, an incidence higher than
in any previously reported study. The
monthly rate of 3.8y0 is constant for the first
24 months, suggesting that the increased incidence is largely due to the increased length
of survival. It can be seen in Fig. 3 that there
is an initial lag in the curve which agrees
with the results noted by Hyman, that the
incidence was less during the 3 months after
diagnosis. This could, perhaps, result from
the fact that most patients, and all those in
this study, received corticosteroids for the
first 6 weeks of their course and therapeutic
doses of cortisone may have decreased the
CNS infiltration. The steady rate of occurrence from diagnosis to 24 months also suggests that the pathology of this complication
is not different in the advanced patient than
in one newly diagnosed. Of interest is the
fact that after 24 months, the rate decreased.
There are several possible explanations; the
more susceptible patients have died or there
has been an increase of some protective factor against CNS involvement.
The reported incidence of CNS leukemia
varied widely between institutions though,
presumably, the investigators were equally
aware of the significance of this complication. The 6 children at the institution reporting a 100% incidence received routine
lumbar punctures as part of their care and
some of their "episodes" of CNS leukemia
were on the basis of CSF findings only. From
this, one might conclude that- all children
would be found to have some degree of CNS viva1 predicted for those who develop CNS
infiltration if routine lumbar punctures were
done but, in fact, this is not so. Several of
the long-term survivors in this study who
had not developed CNS symptoms had lumbar punctures which revealed normal spinal
fluid. An additional factor influencing high
incidence in this institution was the unusually long median survival of these 6 patients, which was 36 months. The authors
considered that the wide range of incidence
was the result of chance and allows the
patients from all institutions to be analyzed
as a single group.
The incidence of CNS symptoms varied
in the different morphological types. Most
of the patients (8201,) had acute undifferentiated or lymphocytic leukemia, and the
incidence in this group was 56%. CNS
leukemia developed in 25% (9/36) of the
patients with leukemia of other types, but at
the same monthly rate. The lower incidence
is probably related to the decreased overall
survival of 8.5 months, compared to 21
months in the patients with lymphocytic leukemia.
No influence of specific chemotherapy on
the development of CNS leukemia coulcl be
seen in this study. The patients on the cyclic
regimen had frequent changes of drug and
those on sequential treatment had MTX or
6-MP as either the first or the final agent.
Initial and subsequent episodes occurred during therapy with all 5 agents, and there was
no difference in the 2 treatment groups. It
is interesting to note that approximately the
same number of episodes occurred while patients were receiving prednisone. Corticosteroids cross the blood brain barrier and, thus,
are sometimes used in the treatment of CNS
leukemia. The dose of the prednisone used
for the maintenance phase of this study was
approximately a third of that normally used
for induction of remission. The lower consequent concentration in the CSF may be a
factor in the incidence reported here.
The development of CNS symptoms is usually thought to indicate a poor prognosis.
If the 7.5 month median survival after the
first episode is added to the 9 months, which
is the median time of incidence, the 16.5-
month total is shorter than the overaII 21-
month survival of patients with CNS disease.
A better way to estimate the effect of this
complication on prognosis is by life-table
analysis, which shows that the median sur- symptoms is 8 months; for those who do not,
the projected figure becomes 24 months. The
results of such an analysis do not allow one
to conclude that the development of CNS leukemia is the sole cause for the poor survival
and that a median survival of 24 months
would prevail if CNS leukemia were eliminated. Conceivably, persistence of the leukemic infiltration does provide a source of
cells to reseed the bone marrow and precipitate a hematologic relapse. Such is the basis
for the studies employing "sanctuary" therapy. It, therefore, appears that attempts to
eradicate leukemic infiltration of the central
nervous system by vigorous treatment with
intrathecal medications, radiotherapy, or
a combination of the 2 might lead to prolonged survival. clude quantitative measures of radiation
dose to active bone marrow for individual
patients as well as cumulative amount of
chemotherapeutic agents. Among more
than 18 000 men with testicular cancer, a
significant dose-dependent risk of leukemia was associated with past radiotherapy
techniques and small but nonsignificant
excesses for modern regimens that limit
treatment to the abdomen and pelvis. Our
investigation reinforces awareness that
large increases in the radiotherapy field
size for testicular cancer that result in
high doses to large volumes of bone marrow can be associated with statistically
significantly elevated risks of leukemia.
Furthermore, we found evidence for an
association between increasing cumulative dose of cisplatin and excess leukemias that adds to the growing body of
knowledge that identifies platinum derivatives as human leukemogens.
Chemotherapy for testicular cancer has
been associated with secondary leukemia
risks that range from 20- to 300-fold (3–
8); however, most estimates were based
on only one to four cases. With 24 patients given platinum-based chemotherapy in our study, strong evidence is
provided for a relationship between cumulative dose of cisplatin and leukemia
risk and parallels findings among ovarian
cancer patients, in whom the largest leukemia risk (RR  7.6) occurred after total amounts of 1000 mg or more (12).
Men in our population-based study received a wide range of cumulative doses
of cisplatin, although amounts, on average, were considerably larger than those
currently used. For example, in view of
modern therapeutic recommendations
(28), it is likely that newly diagnosed testicular cancer patients with an average
body surface area (about 1.8 m2
) receive a
cumulative cisplatin dose in the range of
540–720 mg, less than the average dose
(1480 mg) administered to the case patients in our study but similar to the average total dose (760 mg) given to the
control patients. The estimated 3.2-fold
risk of leukemia at lower cumulative
doses (e.g., 650 mg) of cisplatin in our
study is consistent with the 3.3-fold risk
(95% CI  1.1–9.4) observed among
ovarian cancer patients who received a
median total cisplatin dose of 600 mg
(12). Persistent chromosomal aberrations
have been reported in peripheral blood
lymphocytes of testicular cancer patients
treated with platinum without etoposide
(29), and platinum is carcinogenic in vitro
and in laboratory animals (30).
We were unable to detect a relation
between etoposide and increased leukemia risk when radiation and cisplatin
were taken into account, but only five
case patients and five control patients
were administered etoposide at relatively
low amounts. As reviewed by van Leeuwen (31), chemotherapy with etoposide
and cisplatin for testicular cancer has
been linked with excess leukemias
(4,5,7,8), usually at high cumulative
doses of etoposide (3000 mg/m2
) (4) compared with the lower total doses in our
study (median, 1900 mg/m2
), which are
similar to the less than 2000-mg/m2 dose
used today (28,31). In addition, a recent
comprehensive survey (24) of clinical
trial data concluded that the total dose of
epipodophyllotoxins was not a pivotal
predictor of leukemia risk, reporting that
the 6-year cumulative risk of secondary
leukemia among patients who received
1500–2999 mg/m2 was small (0.7%).
Pedersen-Bjergaard and Rowley (32)
have postulated that cytostatic drugs with
different mechanisms of action, i.e., direct
binding to DNA (cisplatin) and inhibition
of DNA–topoisomerase II (etoposide),
may have a synergistic effect in leukemogenesis, but we were unable to address
this issue.
Although the leukemogenicity of ionizing radiation has been well established
(33), to our knowledge, our investigation
is the first to link convincingly past radiation treatments for testicular cancer to
leukemia, to quantify this risk in terms of
dose to bone marrow, and to estimate
risks associated with modern radiotherapy
practices. Although registry-based surveys (1,34) have suggested previously
that increased risks of leukemia may follow radiotherapy for testicular cancer, role for subsequent chemotherapy could
not be excluded. Nonsignificant excesses
of leukemia were observed following radiation for testicular cancer in several
clinical series, albeit based on few cases
(3,6,35). In addition to the paucity of analytic data, in a review of more than two
decades of the scientific literature, Redman et al. (3) identified a total of nine
patients with leukemia following radiotherapy alone for testicular cancer; a more
recent compilation describes only leukemias associated with chemotherapy (2).
Although the sparse number of cases
treated with surgery alone limited the precision with which we could quantify leukemia excesses, the small risk of leukemia after radiotherapy limited to
abdominal and pelvic fields for testicular
cancer (average treatment dose, 32.7 Gy)
is similar to the twofold risks reported after therapeutic radiation for cancers of the
cervix and endometrium or benign gynecologic disorders (33). When large doses
of radiotherapy are delivered to concentrated areas of bone marrow, as during
treatment for cervical cancer, cell killing
is thought to predominate over cell transformation, and the resultant risks of leukemia are much lower than predicted
based on the studies of atomic bomb survivors, who received lower doses to the
entire body (33). Similarly, among patients given either large-field chest irradiation for breast cancer (15) or radiotherapy for Hodgkin’s disease (16), dosedependent risks of leukemia analogous to
those observed among our patients whose
treatment included chest radiotherapy
have been reported.
The wave-like pattern of excess leukemias that we observed following radiotherapy for testicular cancer is qualitatively similar to patterns observed
among atomic bomb survivors and patients treated for cervical cancer (33), the
largest studies to date to quantify the leukemogenicity of ionizing radiation (36).
Among atomic bomb survivors, leukemia
rates were highest within 10 years of exposure and tapered gradually so that excess risks were observed for four decades.
In contrast, after treatment of cervical
cancer, little radiation excess was apparent beyond 10 years.
Because our investigation was conducted among patients in the general
population covered by well-defined reporting areas, it is unlikely to suffer from
selection biases that may be operant in
hospital or clinic-based series. The large
international study base of more than
18 000 patients treated as early as 1970

allowed us to quantify the radiation effect
over a range of doses to active bone marrow. A limitation of our investigation is
the small numbers of leukemias in various
subgroup analyses, which restrict the inferences that can be made regarding patterns by age at exposure, latency, and interaction with chemotherapy. It is
recognized that studies of late effects of
treatment, including second cancers, are
inherently limited to retrospective examination. Any untoward sequelae associated
with state-of-the-art therapy (37) emerge
only with time. Thus, the clinical relevance of our results, based on patients
diagnosed with testicular cancer between
1970 and 1993, should be interpreted in
light of modern therapeutic practices.
Treatments for a portion (20%) of patients
in our study included mediastinal radiotherapy, which is no longer used. Furthermore, in the 1990s, chemotherapy regimens commonly include etoposide to a
greater extent than in years past (28), and
smaller radiotherapy fields and lower
doses are used (37). For example, the average treatment dose to the abdomen and
pelvis for patients with seminoma in our
study (30.7 Gy; maximum, 45 Gy) is considerably higher than the 25–30 Gy recommended by Bosl et al. (20) to treat
newly diagnosed patients today. Thus,
continued monitoring of late effects as
treatments evolve (38,39) should be encouraged.
While physicians should be reminded
of the possible late toxicity of treatment
of testicular cancer, especially in patients
with an otherwise good prognosis, the
relatively low excess risk of leukemia is
reassuring. For example, in terms of absolute risk, we estimate that, of 10 000
testicular cancer patients treated with 25–
30 Gy radiotherapy to the abdomen and
pelvis and followed for 15 years, an excess of nine to 11 leukemias might be
expected; cisplatin-based chemotherapy,
given at a cumulative dose of about 650
mg, might result in up to 16 excess leukemias over a comparable period. Thus,
when balancing risks and benefits of current radiotherapy techniques or platinumbased chemotherapy in the treatment of
testicular cancer, the substantial improvement in survival far exceeds any small
absolute excess risk of leukemia.Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention.Abstract
Increased long-term survival seen in patients with solid and hematologic cancers achieved as a result of aggressive chemoradiotherapy has come at a price. Therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia has been frequently documented in these patient cohorts, and its biology well studied. Recognition of secondary non-Hodgkin lymphoma as a cause of significant morbidity and mortality in these patients is equally important. The patterns of incidence and latency of secondary lymphomas is distinct from that of myeloid malignancies and other solid cancers. We have systematically analyzed and summarized reports from various groups over the last three decades. Risk of secondary lymphomas increases after the first 5 years of completion of chemotherapy or radiotherapy and persists for more than three decades. This reinforces the need for long-term follow-up of all patients exposed to chemoradiotherapy and confirms that chemotherapeutic agents can cause lymphoma. (Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2007;16(3):377–80)

Introduction
Understanding the pathogenic basis of therapy-related cancers can give significant insights into the nature of the environmental exposures important in the etiology and mechanisms involved in the causation of these tumors. A group of tumors to which this approach can be applied is the non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL). This is a group of related tumors currently best classified according to WHO criteria. Our understanding of the environmental factors relevant to their etiology is limited, and new insights into the etiologic mechanism would be very helpful.

Pathogenesis of NHL
Lymphomas are classified by reference to their normal cellular counterparts that are involved in the immune response. By definition, they have all completed the rearrangement of their immunoglobulin genes to form a functional B cell receptor and are grouped further by their relationship to the germinal center (GC). The characteristic features of the GC response (1) are the introduction of mutation into the immunoglobulin variable region, a process called “somatic hypermutation” and “class switch recombination” (CSR) whereby the constant region of the immunoglobulin (Ig) genes is changed. A further process, which may be involved, is the presence of “receptor editing” or “VDJ recombination,” but the evidence supporting the occurrence of these events at this stage of B-cell ontogeny is contradictory. GC and post-GC tumors seem to arise because of aberrations of all of these mechanisms, a major feature of which is DNA double-strand break (DSB) formation and repair. This process of aberrant Ig recombination and class switch recombination is central to the generation of the t(14;18) translocation seen in follicular lymphoma and the t(8;14) translocation typical of Burkitt lymphoma. What follows from this is that environmental factors, which increase the likelihood of DSBs, are implicated as etiologic factors for the lymphomas.

Etiologic Factors
Despite extensive epidemiologic study, few clues to the environmental factors important in the etiology of the majority of NHL have emerged. Although specific causative links have been identified for certain subtypes of NHL, it has been difficult to generalize these to the majority of incident cases in the western world. It is likely that a characteristic of new candidates worthy of further study would be their ability to interact with and drive aberrant events generated by the processes important in normal lymphocyte biology, increasing the background rate of aberrant DSBs and the likelihood of the development of translocations and mutations. Potential mechanisms and candidates may be suggested by the study of secondary NHL (sNHL).

Secondary Cancers
The earliest report (2) of the association between hematologic malignancies and solid tumors appeared in the late 1950s. However, the link between chemotherapy and predisposition to secondary cancer was not made until two decades later, after a follow-up study (3) of over 400 cases of HL in which ∼3% of patients developed secondary cancer. This study raised serious questions about the role of combined chemo-/radiotherapy in the causation of these tumors. With the availability of data on follow-up of almost three decades, it is clear that the leading cause of mortality and morbidity in this group of patients is the development of secondary cancers. A progressive rise in relative risk and actuarial excess risk of all solid tumors was noted over time, and in some studies, the actuarial excess risk of solid tumors was above 20%, with cancers of the lung, female breast, colon, and stomach being among the most common solid tumors typically occurring after the first 10 years of follow-up with rising incidence throughout the second decade. Although therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most commonly occurring hematologic malignancy occurring in the first 10 years of follow-up, review of these data identified a consistent excess of B-cell NHL occurring in the first 10 years and a steadily rising incidence after that.

Secondary NHL
Krikorian et al. (4) were the first to report the increased risk of sNHL in patients successfully treated for Hodgkin disease. In a systematic analysis of published reports on the incidence of sNHL, we confirm this excess of sNHL. The data in this study were obtained through systematic searches of the literature and included several multinational and multicenter long-term survivor data from cancer registries and hospital-based studies. Hodgkin disease, testicular and ovarian cancer, which respond well to chemotherapy and radiotherapy and are associated with good long-term survivorship, offer the best setting for protracted follow-up to study this question. To avoid anecdotal reporting, studies on smaller groups and case reports were excluded. In addition, where studies were reported by the same group or center at different time points, the most recent reports were chosen. Unfortunately, there was limited information on subtypes of the NHL in most of the studies. Extensive analysis could not be undertaken to identify any specific relationships due to the different quality of information from individual registries and data collected over different time periods.

Heterogeneous and limited information on the treatment of primary cancers did not allow the interpretation of the relationship between secondary malignancy and direct effects of chemoradiotherapy on pathogenesis. A total of 207,834 patients were included. About 6,915 secondary cancers were recorded (Table 1). Of these, sNHL was diagnosed in 425 patients. Because the population size and characteristics of each study are highly variable and the proportion of sNHL in each cohort varied from 0.88% to 16.80%, the weighed average was calculated as 5%. This is in agreement with most reports where the incidence rates varied between 0% and 5.9% (5). Compared with most secondary cancer, the incidence of sNHL is noticeably higher in patients treated for Hodgkin disease. Typically, sNHL develops after the first 5 years of initial therapy of primary cancer. There seems to be a variable period to reach peak incidence with different groups reporting cases with latent periods of 10 to 17 years post–primary therapy. The risk, however, continues to remain high after that. Cases have been reported even after 30 years of follow-up, emphasizing the need for continued patient monitoring. Although specific subtypes have not always been defined, the general consensus is that the sNHLs are often clinically aggressive, high-grade diffuse large cell tumors. These tumors often have an extranodal presentation mainly involving the gastrointestinal tract and central nervous system. Most are B-cell type, but T cell-NHL (6) also has been reported.Pathogenesis of sNHLs
There are a number of potential mechanisms acting in the pathogenesis of sNHL, which can be inferred by a closer analysis of the data.

Link with Radiation
The association between radiation exposure and secondary malignancy in the therapeutic setting is well recognized. However, outside of this setting, there is only limited evidence for an effect of radiation in the pathogenesis of sNHL. Even among the most studied group of atomic bomb survivors in Japan, there was no evidence of an increased risk of sNHL (7). There are, however, reports of increased rates of cancer deaths in patients following radiotherapy of the spine for ankylosing spondylitis (8), but dose effects were not seen. The association of radiotherapy with sNHL is difficult to confirm, in contrast to the association with solid tumors, which is unmistakably present. In a study of HL survivors who were treated with radiotherapy alone, the actuarial excess risk per 10,000 person-years of developing sNHL was found to be 10.6. This could be due to radiotherapy or the pathology of Hodgkin. It was noted that chemo-/radiotherapy had a greater damaging effect than radiotherapy alone, with an actuarial excess risk of 16.1 (9), but this is not always reproduced in other studies. Thus, there is weak but consistent evidence linking radiotherapy exposure to NHL. It is also a plausible association because it causes single- and double-strand DNA breaks. Thus, when lymphoid cells receive sublethal doses of radiotherapy, repair brings with it increased chances of aberrant genetic rearrangements as discussed above.

Cytotoxic Drugs
Cytotoxic drugs are clearly implicated in the pathogenesis of tAML (10) and, by implication, also in sNHL. Both alkylating agents and topoisomerase II inhibitors, implicated in tAML, may also be relevant in sNHL because they are widely used in the treatment of Hodgkin disease, from the study of which most data on sNHL are derived. A major feature of topoisomerase II inhibitors is the generation of DSBs, the repair of which can readily form substrates for inappropriate exchange. The damage caused by alkylating agents is different. The DNA lesions are complex, requiring a variety of repair mechanisms (11). Bulky alkyl groups form primary chloroethyl adducts at N and O atoms in DNA bases; these are normally repaired by O(6)-alkyl G-DNA alkyltransferase (MGMT or AGT). Secondary highly cytotoxic interstrand cross-links require nucleotide excision repair factors (e.g., XPF-ERCC1) for incision and homologous recombination to complete repair, this process may facilitate the generation of DSBs and their aberrant repair.

Accumulation of multiple DSBs leads not only to the activation of repair mechanisms but also to the activation of sensors, including ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM), ataxia telangiectasia related (ATR), and p53, with resultant cell cycle arrest and initiation of apoptosis or repair. The ATM gene, located at 11q22-23, is the primary transducer of the DSB alarm (12). Biallelic ATM inactivation occurs in some cases of sporadic lymphomas, supporting a role of ATM as a tumor suppressor gene; patients with inherited ataxia telangiectasia and an ATM mutation have an elevated predisposition to lymphoreticular malignancies and extreme sensitivity to ionizing radiation and other DSB-inducing agents. The catalytic processes involved in the repair of DSB are prone to error and misrepair, and chromatid exchange, with breaks occurring as a consequence of the GC reaction, may enhance the background rate of aberrant lesions.

Immunosuppression
There is little doubt that severe chronic immunosuppression and its associated immune imbalance can drive aberrant B-cell proliferation. This is most obvious in the case of the congenital immunodeficiency syndromes, which are associated with increased rates of NHL. Patients on long-term immunosuppressive therapy, as seen in the setting of solid organ transplants, are at risk of developing posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease, where immunosuppression rather than the underlying genetic defect leading to immunosuppression is inferred to be the cause for NHL. The role of “minimal” immunosuppression is much more difficult to quantitate. Much of our information on sNHL comes from the study of Hodgkin disease. The question that arises is whether Hodgkin disease posttreatment is associated with immunosuppression. If there is immunosuppression, it is not obvious clinically: there is no excess of infection, either bacterial or viral, compared with other, similarly treated tumors. It would seem unlikely, therefore, that the limited amount of immunosuppression seen in treated Hodgkin disease influences the development of sNHL.

Is sNHL Part of the Natural History of Hodgkin Disease?
A final consideration before firmly associating chemo-/radiotherapy with the risk of sNHL, is whether sNHL is part of the natural history of Hodgkin disease. Lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin disease represents about 5% of all Hodgkin disease and has a distinct natural history. Following treatment, at relapse, the transformation to large B-cell lymphoma is well described and does not relate to treatment (13). This is not true for cases of classic Hodgkin disease. There is a small possibility, however, that sNHL could represent relapse from a Hodgkin disease precursor cell. Hodgkin disease is the result of a crippling mutation within the Ig genes during an abortive GC reaction (14). Studies of rare cases of concurrent Hodgkin disease and follicular lymphoma has identified GC B cell as the common progenitor, with the Hodgkin and NHL clone carrying both shared and distinct somatic mutations.

Whether the presence of an underlying precursor cell is a unifying mechanism is currently uncertain. However, the analysis of sNHL arising from the treatment of other tumor types can answer this question. We have looked at a number of tumor types to address this issue. Long-term survivors of testicular cancers have a notable increase in the incidence of sNHL. In these instances, there is no common precursor cell, and sNHL must be the consequence of damage occurring because of the therapy, i.e., tNHL. The standard form of treatment for these cancers consists of orchidectomy and local radiotherapy or chemotherapy, implicating exposure to these in the pathogenesis of sNHL. There are a number of cancer genes unique to breast cancer, and a subset of these patients seem to have increased rates of sNHL. Therefore, whereas relapse from a precursor cell may explain some cases of sNHL in Hodgkin disease, the common unifying exposure is chemotherapy.

Conclusion
Exposure to chemotherapy and radiotherapy results in single- and double-stranded breaks and interstrand cross-links. There are a number of mechanisms leading to the repair of these lesions that may interact with the normal GC mechanisms to increase the risk of aberrant recombination events and malignant transformation. The agents that cause this damage, alkylating agents, topoisomerase inhibitors, and radiotherapy, all cause these lesions. In conclusion, therapeutic agents used in the therapy of primary cancers causing DSBs may be implicated as causal factors in the etiology of sNHL.Non-Hodgkin lymphoma.Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is a non-specific term that includes several lymphoproliferative malignant diseases with different
clinical and histological appearances. Here, we concentrate on adult lymphomas. We look at their molecular basis, at the
development of a classification system based on a better understanding of the biology of the various subgroups, and at
how refinement of adverse prognostic factor groupings helps in clinical management. Lymphomas can present in various
ways and be difficult to diagnose. About a quarter of cases arise extranodally and might present special problems.
Developments in cytotoxic chemotherapy have led to good long-term survival prospects for aggressive lymphoma;
introduction of novel approaches, including monoclonal antibody therapy, offers promise for indolent lymphoma, and should
further improve prognosis for aggressive tumours.Non-Hodgkin lymphomas represent about 2·4% of all
cancers registered in England and Wales, and 2·6% of all
cancer deaths. Prevalence rises with age and is about 50%
higher in men than women. Prevalence is highest in North
America and western Europe and lower in eastern Europe
and Asia. For the past 20 years, the incidence has been
rising steadily across all age groups and in both sexes, by
about 3–5% per year. Reasons for this increase are unclear.
In most cases of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, cause is
unknown. Some subtypes are associated with infection, for
example, Epstein-Barr virus in Burkitt’s lymphoma,
patients with constitutional (Purtilo’s syndrome) or postorgan-transplant immune deficiencies, and human
T-lymphotropic virus in adult T-cell leukaemia and
lymphoma. Immunosuppression is the most clearly defined
risk factor, leading to 50–100-fold excess risk.
Biology
Most lymphoid malignancies worldwide are derived from
B-lymphocytes at various stages of differentiation
(figure 1). Therefore, to understand the structure, cellular
composition, changes in gene expression, and molecular
events implicated in the differentiation and function of
normal B cells is important. Two types of lymphoid tissue
exist: central (bone marrow and thymus) and peripheral
(blood, spleen, lymph node, and mucosa-associated).
Within central lymphoid tissue, cells arise and differentiate
into mature lymphocytes; they then migrate into peripheral
lymphoid tissues and recirculate throughout the body. If
they encounter foreign antigen, effector and memory cells
evolve. Differentiation of B cells in central and peripheral
lymphoid tissues entails changes in cytological and homing
mechanisms, which are correlated to genetic events and
changes in gene expression (table 1).
Similar to most human cancers, the genetic lesions
involved in non-Hodgkin lymphoma include activation of
proto-oncogenes and disruption of tumour suppressor
genes.1 By contrast with many types of epithelial cancers
that are characterised by generalised random instability of
their genome, the genome of lymphoma cells is relatively
stable.2 Furthermore, lymphomas generally do not have the microsatellite instability that is caused by defects in DNA
the mismatch repair genes in some hereditary cancer
predisposition syndromes and in a few sporadic solid
cancers.3,4 Historically, detection of recurrent, non-random
chromosomal abnormalities by karyotypic analysis of nonHodgkin lymphoma metaphases has presented the major
clue towards identification and cloning of most genetic
alterations in these disorders.
Chromosomal translocations represent the main
mechanism of proto-oncogene activation. These
translocations are characterised by recurrence within a
specific clinicopathological category of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma and are clonally represented in each tumour. All
chromosomal translocations in this disorder that have been
cloned up to now share a common feature—ie, presence of
a proto-oncogene mapping to the vicinity of one of two
chromosomal recombination sites. They tend to juxtapose
the proto-oncogene to heterologous regulatory sequences
derived from the partner chromosome. These sequences
might derive from antigen-receptor loci and from other loci
that are expressed at sustained concentrations in normal
cells corresponding to the differentiation stage of the
lymphoma (table 2).
The typical result of translocation is deregulated
expression of a proto-oncogene. The two exceptions are
t(2;5) of T-cell anaplastic large cell lymphoma and t(11;18)
of mucosa-associated lymphoma tissue (MALT)
lymphoma, which cause gene fusions coding for chimeric
proteins.5,6
Histopathological classification
Many classifications of non-Hodgkin lymphoma have been
made in the past 30–40 years, which can be difficult to
interpret and reproduce. By understanding the origin of a
lymphoma, more can be understood about disease
management. Different lymphomas have various origins;they have diverse clinical behaviour and prognosis. A
classification system that is constantly updated when new
information—both clinical (prognosis, treatment) and
pathological (histology, immunology, genetics)—becomes
available is important. In 1993, the International
Lymphoma Study Group—consisting of eminent
histopathologists from the USA, Europe, and Asia—met
and subsequently published the revised EuropeanAmerican classification of lymphoid neoplasms (REAL
classification).7 Lymphomas were identified as specific
entities on the basis of morphological
appearances, which were lent support
by immunophenotype and genetic
features. Publication of this
classification was followed by rigorous
clinical assessment to establish its
validity and reproducibility. It was
recorded to be 85% reproducible
among pathologists, and it defined new
diseases with distinctive clinical features
and responses to treatment, thereby
convincing oncologists to accept it.8 In
2001, the classification system was
updated under the auspices of WHO by
the Society for Haematopathology and
the European Association of
Haematopathology (table 3).9
For doctors who treat lymphomas,
clinical differences between the most
common diseases are easily
appreciated—large B-cell lymphoma,
follicular lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, and Hodgkin’s disease.
Many recognised diseases are also
clinically distinctive: MALT lymphoma
and mantle-cell lymphoma are strikingly
different from each other and from
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and
small lymphocytic lymphoma, and need
different approaches to treatment.
Peripheral T-cell lymphomas consist of
many distinctive categories that differ in
their natural history from B-cell
lymphomas. As practitioners begin to see patients with these
diseases, their characteristic clinical features will provide a
real-life rationale for learning the new categories.
The most typical lymphomas are of diffuse large B-cell
type (33%) followed by B-cell follicular lymphoma (22%).
All other types of lymphoma have a frequency of less than
10% (table 3).8 An algorithm can be used to establish
diagnosis on the basis of gene expression,
immunophenotype, morphology, homing patterns, and
proliferation fraction (panel 1).compression, for instance of ureter, orbit, or spinal cord.
With aggressive lymphomas, rapid tumour growth takes
place, and patients might quickly become very ill.
The standard staging system for non-Hodgkin lymphoma
is the same as that proposed for Hodgkin’s disease at the
Ann Arbor conference in 1971.11 Its main use is to
distinguish localised stage 1 and 2 disease from the
disseminated stages 3 and 4. For some subtypes, especially
indolent lymphomas, widespread disease is typical without
necessarily conferring poor prognosis. Also, staging does not
take into account certain prognostic factors or some
prognostically important sites of involvement—especially
bone marrow and central nervous system.
Patients can present with lumps almost anywhere. Fewer
than a quarter present with a lump in the neck. About a
quarter of patients present with disease at an extranodal
site, the main sites being gastrointestinal tract, head and
neck, and skin, but virtually any tissue or organ can be
affected.12 Presentation might also be multifocal.
Occasionally, a patient could present with symptoms only
(for example fatigue, night sweats, or weight loss) and no
mass that is easy to biopsy (table 4). According to UK
Department of Health referral guidelines for suspected
cancer,13 patients with the symptoms in panel 2 should be
urgently referred.
All patients with, or who potentially have, lymphoma
should have their management discussed by a multidisciplinary team.14 This discussion, together with informed
entry into clinical trials, is essential for the patient’s own
optimum treatment and for the contribution to the
evidence-base for future improvements in care.15 Treatment
of lymphoma should be continually evolving. Investigations
are as in panel 3.
Prognostic factors
Management of patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma is
mainly affected by tumour type and extent, patient’s
performance status, and previous medical history.
Indicators to determine prognosis have been avidly
investigated. Clinical prognostic features are mainly a
surrogate for disease bulk. Factors that have generally been
accepted as being associated with a poor prognosis include
age older than 60 years, poor performance status,
B symptoms, disseminated stage, an abdominal mass more
than 10 cm in diameter, three or more extranodal sites of
disease, bone-marrow involvement, concentration in serum
of lactate dehydrogenase above normal, and transformation
from previous low-grade histology. phenotype has been shown for large-cell lymphoma, other
than anaplastic, and should be taken into consideration
when choosing treatment.18
In the future, we can expect that new biological
prognostic factors will be identified and that their
importance will be compared with the clinical IPI. In
follicular lymphoma, genomic aberration might contribute
substantially to prognostic risk assessment,19 and in diffuse
B-cell lymphoma is possible to identify gene expression
subgroups with differing survivals by molecular profiling.20
The importance of treatment-related factors is not very
clear. Results of several reports suggest a good cure rate in
lymphoma patients who respond most rapidly to
chemotherapy.21
Treatment
Mainstays of treatment for non-Hodgkin lymphoma have
been chemotherapy or radiotherapy. However, we are now
entering an exciting era when use of novel treatments,
including monoclonal antibodies, is being assessed and put
into everyday practice.
Indolent lymphomas
Follicular lymphoma
Only a few patients with follicular lymphoma have localised
disease potentially curable by radiotherapy, with complete
remission in 98% and an estimated 10-year disease-free
survival for 47%.22 Most have disseminated disease at
diagnosis. This disease tends to be chronic relapsing and
remitting, and standard chemotherapy is not curative.
Regimens include: oral chlorambucil; cyclophosphamide,
vincristine, and prednisolone (CVP); fludarabine; or
anthracycline-containing regimens. They differ in toxic
effects but none affects overall survival. For a patient with
no major symptoms or organ dysfunction, a watch-and-wait
policy can be undertaken, which usually delays initiation of
chemotherapy by 2 or 3 years. However, for most patients,
this disease is incurable, and new treatments need to be
assessed.
Rituximab is a chimeric human-murine IgG1 monoclonal
antibody that binds specifically to the B-cell surface antigen Discrepancies in different series, and recognition of the
importance of prognostic factors, led to an overview analysis
of more than 3000 patients with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma treated with conventional chemotherapy
between 1982 and 1987.16 In multivariate analysis, five
features independently contributed to prognosis: age, stage,
number of extranodal sites, performance status, and serum
concentration of lactate dehydrogenase. Patients could be
divided into four groups with decreasing complete response
rates and shortened survival. This model has been called the
International Prognostic Index (IPI) and has been validated
by many groups—eg, in patients treated with doxorubicin,
cyclophosphamide, vindesine, and bleomycin (ACVB).17
Moreover, it is applicable to various histological subtypes.
This study was unable to include other markers such as
immunophenotyping, 2 microglobulin, or BCL2 protein
expression. Prognostic importance of T-cell immuno CD20 (figure 2). The glycosylated protein consists of the
constant regions of human IgGs combined with the variable
region from murine IgGs, and is produced by Chinese
hamster ovary cells in suspension culture.23 The antibody
induces both complement-mediated and antibodydependent cytotoxic effects on CD20-positive cells. It has
also been reported to induce apoptosis and sensitise
chemoresistant human lymphoma cell lines to cytotoxic
chemotherapy.23–25 The antibody is well tolerated and its
main toxic effect is either haematological (thrombocytopenia and neutropenia) or infusion-related. Prevalence
of human antichimeric antibody is less than 10%.26–28 It has
important single-agent efficacy, giving remission rates of
40–50% in the treatment of relapsed indolent
lymphoma,29–31 and has now received UK National Institute
for Clinical Excellence approval for patients who have failed
standard chemotherapy.
Rituximab acts via many effector mechanisms, which are
quite distinct from those of standard chemotherapeutic
drugs. It activates complement-mediated23 and antibodydependent cytotoxicity.32 As a result, a trial combining
rituximab with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine,
and prednisolone (CHOP) in patients with indolent
lymphoma has been undertaken.33 This regimen gave an
overall response rate of 95% (40 patients studied), with
55% achieving a complete response. At present, median
duration of response and time to progression for these
patients has not been reached after 50 months of follow-up.
Rituximab has also been assessed in combination with
fludarabine,34,35 since results of a phase 2 study in 49 patients
investigating fludarabine as first-time treatment for follicular
lymphoma indicated a response rate of 65%, with a
complete response rate of 37% and median relapse-free
survival of about 16 months.36 Results seem to be similar to
CHOP plus rituximab.
Transformed indolent lymphoma
Indolent lymphomas of different types can transform into
high-grade malignancies. This change happens in up to
40% of patients and leads to death.37 Treatment needs to be
the same as that for high-grade lymphoma, if the patient is
fit enough. The results are, however, much worse than for
patients presenting de novo with high-grade lymphoma.
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and small lymphocytic
lymphoma
This slowly progressive form of lymphoma, as its name
implies, shows considerable overlap with B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia. Most patients are adults older than
60 years who present with generalised lymphadenopathy
and bone marrow, liver, spleen, and peripheral-blood
involvement. A conservative approach to treatment—
similar to that in follicular lymphoma—is usual; when
salvage chemotherapy is needed these tumours are more
likely than follicular lymphomas to respond to purine
analogues of adenosine arabinoside (fludarabine or
cladribine).
Mantle-cell lymphoma
With standard treatment (including CHOP), median
survival for patients with this disorder is about 3 years, far
shorter than that for patients with other indolent
lymphomas; for this reason, mantle-cell lymphoma must
now be regarded as an aggressive disorder.38 Attempts to
improve survival have used new treatments, such as highdose treatment with autologous stem-cell rescue, allogeneic
transplantation, and immune therapy with either free or
radiolabelled monoclonal antibodies.39 One novel
approach—pioneered at the M D Anderson Cancer
Centre—is the hyper-CVAD regimen (high-dose cytarabine
and methotrexate with rituximab).40 As yet, no randomised
controlled trial evidence is available to show that such
approaches are better than conventional treatments.
Aggressive lymphoma
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Historically, radiotherapy to the involved field has been the
treatment of choice for patients with localised disease.
However, this therapy is insufficient and, even after
adequate dosage, about 15% of patients will develop in-field
relapse and others will relapse with disease outside the
radiation field. Therefore, in the past 15 years, two
strategies have been developed for patients with stage 1–2
disease (without poor prognostic factors): chemotherapy alone with a doxorubicin-containing regimen, eg, CHOP;
or a shortened course of chemotherapy followed by
involved-field radiotherapy. In one study, 78 patients with
stage 1–2 disease (IPI 0) received three courses of CHOP
followed by involved-field radiotherapy. The response rate
was 99%, with long-term survival of 85% for these
patients.41 In another study, three cycles of CHOP plus
radiotherapy (200 patients) was compared with eight cycles
of CHOP (201 patients). Patients receiving both treatments
had longer progression-free survival (77%) and better
overall survival (82%) than those treated with CHOP alone
(64% and 72%, respectively).42 In patients with extranodal
localisation in the abdomen and in older patients with
Waldeyer’s ring involvement, radiotherapy can be avoided
to keep the risk of sequelae to a minimum.
For patients with advanced-stage disease, the most
effective treatment is chemotherapy. Results show that
patients with advanced-stage bulky disease do not
consistently relapse at sites of major initial disease, at least
when they have received modern aggressive
chemotherapy.43 Many combination-chemotherapy
regimens have been developed. CHOP has been the
standard first-line treatment in most centres and is curative
in at least a third of patients with large-cell lymphomas, as
confirmed by 12 years of follow-up. Long-term follow-up is
indeed necessary, since results have shown that relapses can
happen many years after completion of chemotherapy.44
Addition of rituximab to CHOP has been shown in one
large phase 3 study (in patients age older than 60 years),45
and in several phase 2 trials, to improve response rates and
survival. New chemotherapy regimens are also being
assessed, which include either rapid alternation of different
drugs or dose escalation.
With the availability of growth-factor support, maximally
tolerated non-myeloblative doxorubicin-based regimens
have been developed for advanced disease. Two approaches
are being investigated: to escalate dose of CHOP while
maintaining a schedule every 3 weeks;46 or to administer
standard CHOP on a shortened schedule, every 2 weeks.47
With both regimens, the dose-limiting factors were severe
infection, associated with neutropenia, and nonhaematological toxic effects. To date, response rates have
been unremarkable, the major problem being in attainment
of the planned dose intensity, but data are still immature.
The future lies with development of different protocols for
various risk groups and combination with novel treatments.
Burkitt’s lymphoma
Burkitt’s lymphoma is most frequent in childhood, and
adult cases of disease are treated as for the childhood form.
Clinical assessment is different from other lymphomas, and
if one of the following symptoms is present, the patient is
deemed high risk: stage 3–4 disease, raised lactate
dehydrogenase concentration, poor performance status, and
a mass greater than 10 cm. Patients receive intensive
chemotherapy together with repeated intrathecal
treatments, which gives a survival of about 80%.48
Lymphoblastic lymphoma
This lymphoma is also very aggressive and is treated with
regimens based on strategies for acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia, with due attention also being paid to the central
nervous system as a potential sanctuary site.
Peripheral T-cell lymphoma
This type of lymphoma is rare in western populations but is
most frequent—and generally related to HTLV-1 virus
infection—in Asia. It is made up of a heterogeneous group
of neoplasms, some very rare, that differ by their
morphology, phenotype, clinical presentation, and
outcome.49 Overall however, these are aggressive tumours
with a median survival of less than 4 years—worse than with
aggressive tumours of the B-cell phenotype.50
Extranodal lymphomas
Extranodal lymphomas in general should be treated as for
nodal disease. Aggressive lymphomas are usually treated
with combined chemoradiotherapy, producing an 80%
5-year survival, a 20–30% improvement on treatment with
radiotherapy alone.51 Certain extranodal lymphomas
present special clinical management problems.
Gastric lymphoma of MALT type
Although MALT-type marginal-zone lymphomas arise at
other sites (such as salivary gland, lung, and thyroid), gastric
MALT lymphomas are uniquely related to previous
infection with Helicobacter pylori. Eradication with
appropriate antibiotics results in regression of the
lymphoma in three-quarters of patients,52 although fewer
than half achieve sustained molecular remission.53 The
10-year survival is about 90%, although transformation to
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma can happen.
Lymphoma of the central nervous system
Primary lymphoma of the central nervous system is an
aggressive tumour (usually of diffuse large B-cell type)
arising in brain, leptomeninges, or eye. Its prevalence has
risen strikingly in the immunocompetent population.
Traditionally, radiotherapy was the treatment of choice,54
but tumour recurrence was common, and chemotherapy
(with high-dose methotrexate-based regimens), combined
with irradiation, has strikingly enhanced average survival to
up to 5 years.55 However, late neurotoxic effects are a typical
complication of this approach, and chemotherapy alone is
being tested.
Testicular lymphoma
Although rare, primary testicular lymphoma is the most
frequent testicular malignancy in men older than age
60 years. Pathology is usually of diffuse large B-cell type,
and despite apparently localised presentation, prognosis is
worse than with most other sites with the same histological
findings. A high frequency of central nervous system relapse
has been noted,56 so much so that prophylactic intrathecal
chemotherapy has been advocated in addition to CHOP
and adjuvant radiotherapy. However, as yet no hard
evidence exists to justify routine use of this approach.
Overall, about a quarter of testicular lymphomas are
cured.57
New approaches
High-dose chemotherapy
For aggressive lymphoma in first remission
High-dose treatment with autologous stem-cell
transplantation has the potential to improve the cure rate of
chemosensitive disease.58 One of the greatest challenges is to
identify patients who will fail to respond to standard
chemotherapy or whose responses will be short-lived. The
IPI still seems to be a robust indicator of at-risk patients.
Several investigators have therefore taken an at-risk
subgroup (usually with at least two adverse IPI factors) and
looked at giving these patients high-dose therapy when they
have achieved a good response with first-line treatment—
that is, in an adjuvant setting. The GELA group have
shown a disease-free survival advantage associated with
high-dose chemotherapy for poor-risk patients in first
remission,59 but this finding does not accord with those of
other studies,60–62 which might be because patients
subsequently relapsing after standard treatment are salvaged
by high-dose treatment at a later date. Further studies are
underway, looking at timing of the procedure, different
chemotherapy regimens, use of antibodies, and high doses
of chemotherapy given in sequential fashion rather than all
at once.63
For refractory or relapsed aggressive high-grade lymphoma
Until a few years ago, patients with aggressive lymphoma
who relapsed or failed to achieve a complete response had a
life expectancy of between 3 and 4 months. Various salvage
regimens have now been developed that achieve an overall
survival at 2 years of 20–30%. High-dose chemotherapy has
been shown—by workers on a randomised controlled
study—to substantially improve survival to over 50%.58 A
total of 215 patients in first or second relapse were studied;
after two courses of salvage treatment patients were
randomised to continue salvage therapy or have high-dose
treatment with autologous stem-cell transplantation. The
response rate after high-dose treatment was 93·7% versus
42·5%, and event-free survival at 5 years was 53% versus
32% in the salvage alone arm. Patients selected for this
study had previously been in complete response and had no
bone marrow or central nervous system involvement or
T-cell morphology.
For indolent lymphoma
Single-centre studies have shown promising results. Large
multicentre trials are underway and results of these are
awaited.
Allogeneic stem-cell transplantation
Allogeneic transplantation for lymphoma can result in
extended survival, which is unfortunately offset by
considerable transplant-related mortality (40%) and
morbidity.64 At present, therefore, insufficient evidence
exists to consider this treatment outside clinical studies,
even in patients who cannot receive or have failed
autologous stem-cell transplantation. If reductions in
transplant mortality can be achieved, it is anticipated that
the role of allografting for lymphoma will become more
important. In this context, reports of non-myeloablative
regimens that aim to keep graft-versus-lymphoma effect to a
maximum but reduce transplant-related mortality (so-called
mini allografting) seem promising.65
Radiolabelled monoclonal antibody treatments
Many radioisotopes are under investigation, the two main
contenders being iodine-131 and yttrium-90, usually in
association with anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (figure 2).
These isotopes have usually been given in nonmyeloablative doses, but also in myeloablative doses as part
of transplant procedures.66 Radiolabelled antibodies can
have an important role in treatment of refractory or
transformed low-grade lymphomas. In a study by Kaminski
and colleagues,67 60 patients were reported who had been
treated previously with at least two chemotherapy regimens,
the last being at least 6 months before. Every patient
received one course of tositumomab. 39 patients (65%)
responded, and median duration of response had not been
reached after follow-up of more than 47 months. Only one
patient was admitted with neutropenic fever, five developed
human antimurine antibodies, and one had raised
concentration of thyroid-stimulating hormone after
treatment. In a randomised trial comparing
90Y ibritumomab tiuxetan with rituximab alone, the overall
response rate was higher for the radiolabelled antibody
(80% vs 56%, p=0·002, 143 patients).68 However, more
studies are needed to assess longer-term effects.Vaccine treatments
These treatments have been mainly aimed at follicle-centre
lymphomas, since the idiotype determinants of the
immunoglobulin synthesised by these cells are known to be
unique and can serve as a tumour-specific antigen. Kwak
and colleagues69 reported use of purified autologous
immunoglobulin as vaccine for patients with follicular
lymphoma. 12 patients were vaccinated after high-dose
chemotherapy; ten patients mounted idiotype-specific
humoral or specific responses and seven have had
lengthened remissions.70 Idiotypic vaccination is timeconsuming and dependent on good laboratory backup.
These results are promising but preliminary.
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma.Lymphomas are solid tumours of the immune system. Hodgkin’s lymphoma accounts for about 10% of all
lymphomas, and the remaining 90% are referred to as non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas have a
wide range of histological appearances and clinical features at presentation, which can make diagnosis diffi cult.
Lymphomas are not rare, and most physicians, irrespective of their specialty, will probably have come across a
patient with lymphoma. Timely diagnosis is important because eff ective, and often curative, therapies are available
for many subtypes. In this Seminar we discuss advances in the understanding of the biology of these malignancies
and new, available treatments.
Epidemiology
Since non-Hodgkin lymphoma was last reviewed in
The Lancet in 2003,1
 biological understanding of these
malignancies has advanced and treatments have improved. Around 12 294 people were diagnosed with
non-Hodgkin lymphoma in the UK in 2009, and about
4452 people in the UK died of the disease in 2010.2,3
Corresponding numbers in the USA were 65 540 new
cases (in 2007) and 20 210 deaths (in 2008).4
 More than
two-thirds of patients are 60 years and older.2,3 NonHodgkin lymphoma is the fi fth most frequently
diagnosed cancer in the UK, with roughly equal numbers
of cases in men and women; however, because the
population contains more women than men, the male
age-standardised incidence per 100 000 men (17·7) is
higher than the female incidence (12·8).2,3,5 The frequency
of specifi c subtypes of lymphoma varies substantially by
geographic region. For example, adult T-cell lymphoma
associated with infection by human T-cell lymphotropic
virus type 1 is much more frequent in east Asia than in
other regions, as is nasal natural killer (NK)-cell or T-cell
lymphoma associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection,
whereas follicular lymphomas are more frequent in
western Europe and North America.6
 Diff use large B-cell
lymphoma, by contrast, is common worldwide.
The incidence of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is increasing
in many regions. In England, Scotland, and Wales, the
age-standardised incidence has increased by 35% in
30 years (1988–2007).2,3,5 A similar trend has been
recorded in the USA, with a 3·7% yearly percentage
increase in the incidence of non-Hodgkin lymphoma
between 1975 and 1991, and a 0·3% yearly increase from
1992 to 2007.7
 The incidence in Brazil, India, Japan,
Singapore, and western Europe has also increased.8–10
The reason for this long-term increase is unclear,
although the emergence of HIV caused an additional
increase in the incidence of non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Survival in England and Wales has improved substantially
during the past four decades, with 50·8% of patients now
expected to survive for longer than 10 years, compared
with only 21·8% of those diagnosed in the early 1970s.11
The most well established risk factor for the
development of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is immunosuppression. Patients with HIV have an increased risk of
developing high-grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Others
at increased risk include organ-transplant recipients,
patients who have had high-dose chemotherapy with
stem-cell transplantation, and those with inherited
immunodefi ciency syndromes or autoimmune disease.
Infection does play a part in development of some
lymphomas, either by inhibition of immune function, or
by other mechanisms, such as induction of chronic
infl ammatory response. The Epstein-Barr virus, for
example, has recognised asso ciations with Burkitt’s and
nasal NK-cell or T-cell lymphomas, and Helicobacter pylori
infection is a risk factor for gastric mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Other microorganisms
thought to be associated with specifi c lymphomas
include hepatitis C virus with splenic marginal-zone
lymphoma, Borrelia burgdorferi with cutaneous mucosaassociated lymphoid tissue lymphoma, and Chlamydia
psittaci with ocular adnexal lymphoma.12
Pathophysiology
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas encompass a heterogeneous
group of cancers, 85–90% of which arise from B lymphocytes; the remainder derive from T lymphocytes or NK
lymphocytes. This diverse group of malignancies usually
develops in the lymph nodes, but can occur in almost any
tissue, and ranges from the more indolent follicular
lymphoma, to the more aggressive diff use large B-cell and
Burkitt’s lymphomas. Several diff erent classifi cation
systems have been proposed that have grouped these
malignancies according to their histological charac teristics.
The most recent system is the fourth edition of the WHO
classifi cation of tumours of haemopoietic and lymphoid
tissues, published in 2008 (table 1).13 It built upon the
2001 third edition and applied new fi ndings from clinical
and laboratory research to provide guidance on how to
recognise early or in-situ lesions by assessment of B-cell clonal expan sion and less often T-cell expansion, which
seem to have a decreased potential for malignant transformation; appreciate patient age as a defi ning feature of
some subtypes (eg, follicular and nodal marginal-zone
lymphomas have variants that present almost exclusively
in children and are clinically and biologically distinct from
their counter parts aff ect ing adults); and recognise borderline categories that share common morphological and
immunopheno typical fea tures with other subtypes of
lymphoma—eg, primary media stinal large B-cell lymphoma shares features with mediastinal nodular sclerosing
classic Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
Despite this classifi cation refi nement, some groups
remain heterogeneous, such as diff use large B-cell
lymphoma, not otherwise specifi ed, and peripheral
T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specifi ed. Further subclassi fi cation of these entities is a probable focus of
future research.
To understand the mechanisms by which lymphomas
might develop, the events that occur during normal
B-cell maturation should be considered (fi gure). During
normal B-cell development, cells arise from the central
lymphoid tissues (bone marrow and thymus), where
recombination of gene segments results in the assembly
of immunoglobulin heavy-chain and light-chain genes,
enabled by enzymes that cause breaks in double-stranded
DNA.14 In normal cells, DNA repair processes are
activated, but these strand breaks can contribute to
chromosome translocations in lymphoma.15 Such translocations typically result in proto-oncogene activation.
Once B lymphocytes have matured they migrate into the
peripheral lymphoid tissues (blood, spleen, lymph node,
and mucosa-associated). Normal B-cell activation occurs
in the germinal centre of lymph nodes when antigen in
conjunction with signals from T lymphocytes activates
mature B cells. The germinal centre is thought to be the
source of many types of lymphoma, including diff use
large B-cell lymphoma, follicular lymphoma, and
Burkitt’s lymphoma.14,16 During the germinal centre
reaction, centroblasts (rapidly dividing B cells with a noncleaved nucleus) in the dark zone of the germinal centre
expand rapidly in response to the surrounding antigenspecifi c T cells and follicular dendritic cells bearing
antigen. Centroblasts periodically enter the germinal
centre light zone where they become centro cytes (nondividing B cells with a cleaved nucleus), which remove
antigen from follicular dendritic cells and present it to
T cells. Centrocytes can revert back to centroblasts, or
diff erentiate into memory B cells or plasma cells.14
During this germinal centre reaction, cells undergo two
distinct modifi cations to their DNA: class-switch
recombination, whereby the immuno globulin heavychain class might change from IgM to IgG, IgA, or IgE;
and somatic hypermutation, in which the variable
immunoglobulin (IgV) light chain mutates, thus
modifying the affi nity of a population of B cells for a
particular antigen.14 These normal genetic modifi cations
are a mechanism by which DNA damage can lead to
lymphoma, and also allow the subtypes of lymphoma to
be divided into non-Hodgkin lymphomas with and
without IgV mutations.
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas without IgV mutations
consist of pregerminal centre-derived non-Hodgkin
lymph omas (eg, most cases of mantle-cell lymphoma)
and other tumours arising from B cells that, although
derived from the germinal centre, have not undergone
somatic hypermutation (applies to about a third of cases
of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia or small
lymphocytic lymphoma).17 Non-Hodgkin lymphomas
with IgV mutations that arise from germinal centre or
postgerminal-centre B cells include Burkitt’s lymphoma,
follicular lymphoma, lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma,
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma, and
diff use large B-cell lymphoma.17
The developmental biology of peripheral T-cell lymphoma is less well understood, and most subtypes are not associated with distinct genetic or biological changes.
Nevertheless, angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma bears
a close relation to the follicular helper T cell of the
germinal centre, and the follicular variant of peripheral
T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specifi ed, shares a similar
phenotype, although this subtype diff ers genetically and
clinically. Unlike B-cell lymphomas, recurring translocations that activate specifi c oncogenes are unusual in
T-cell lymphomas, apart from the t(2;5) involving ALK
seen in anaplastic large cell lymphoma. However, gene
expression profi ling of peripheral T-cell lymphomas has
shown characteristic patterns of gene expression in the
major subtypes, with the exception of peripheral T-cell
lymph oma, not otherwise specifi ed. Most nodal peripheral
T-cell lymphomas seem to be related to effector T cells.18
Unlike most solid tumours, which typically have substantial genetic instability, lymphomas generally have a
stable genome. Rather, chromosomal trans locations,
which typically occur in malignancies of the haemopoietic
system, are implicated.17 These trans locations typically
result in the presence of a proto-oncogene in the
proximity of the chromosomal recombination sites. For
example, the genetic hallmark of follicular lymphoma is
the t(14;18) chromosomal translocation, which causes the
juxtaposition of the BCL2 gene on chromosome 18 to the
transcriptionally active immunoglobulin heavy-chain
region on chromosome 14. This translocation can be
detected in 80–90% of cases, and upregulates BCL2,
which increases the apoptotic threshold and prevents
programmed cell death.14 A similar process occurs in
Burkitt’s lymphoma, which is characterised by the
dysregulation of MYC on chromosome 8, most often by
the juxtaposition of MYC with the immunoglobulin
heavy locus on chromosome 14 via a t(8;14) translocation.
In mantle-cell lymphoma, the cyclin-D1 region of
chromosome 11 translocates to the same immunoglobulin
heavy locus on chromosome 14.
Clinical presentation and staging
Clinical presentation is dependent on the site of involvement, natural history of the lymphoma subtype, and
presence or absence of B symptoms (weight loss >10%,
night sweats, body temperature >38°C). Two-thirds of
patients present with painless lymphadenopathy, which is
more often generalised than in Hodgkin’s lymphoma.19
Low-grade lymphomas typically present with peripheral
lymphadenopathy that can vary in size. The more aggressive lymphomas can cause fulminant symptoms and
signs needing prompt assessment and treatment.
In most solid tumours, advanced stage of disease often
correlates with poor prognosis, but this association is
not always noted with lymphoma. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is staged with the Ann Arbor classifi cation system,
which was originally designed for Hodgkin’s lymphoma
in 1971 (table 2).20
CT is the standard means of disease assessment above
and below the diaphragm, replacing chest radiography,
lymphangiography, and staging laparotomy. MRI is better
than CT at detecting CNS and bone diseases.19,21 PET
scanning with 2-[18F]fl uoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG), a
glucose analogue labelled with a positron emitter, is
increasingly being used in the management of lymphomas. Diff erent subtypes of non-Hodgkin lymphoma
exhibit varied avidity for FDG, with the most common
subtypes (diff use large B-cell, follicular, and mantle-cell
lymphomas) believed to be routinely FDG avid, whereas
extranodal marginal-zone, small lymphocytic, and T-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphomas are variably FDG avid.19,22,23 In
subgroups that are routinely avid, PET scanning detects
disease with a sensitivity of 80% and a specifi city of
90%.19,22,24,25 Pretreatment PET scans can result in upstaging; however, PET scans are most widely used to assess
response to therapy.
Any organ can be the primary site of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma. However, the gastrointestinal tract is the most
frequent extranodal site in non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and
the stomach is the most frequently implicated part of the
gastrointestinal tract. Gastric lymphomas are usually
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas, or
diff use large B-cell lymphoma on a background of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Endoscopic ultrasound might be used for part of the initial
staging. Lymphoma of the stomach often coexists with
lymphoma of the Waldeyer’s ring, so this association
should also be assessed in patients with gastrointestinal
involvement, and vice versa.26 Mantle-cell lymphomas are
associated with the colon in most cases when masked
biopsies are done, and occasionally present with lymphomatous polyposis.27 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is the
most common testicular tumour in men older than
60 years. These testicular tumours are usually aggressive
B-cell tumours, and sites of other involvement include
the contralateral testis and the CNS.26
The International Prognostic Index (IPI) is the most
widely used prognostic model for patients with nonHodgkin lymphoma.28 First introduced for aggressive
non-Hodgkin lymphoma, clinical features independently associated with survival were age (≤60 years vs
>60 years), lactate dehydrogenase concentration (normal
vs abnor mal), Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
performance status (<2 vs ≥2), Ann Arbor stage (I/II vs
III/IV), and number of extranodal sites implicated
(≤one vs >one). From this, four risk groups were
delineated: low risk (zero to one clinical feature), lowintermediate risk (two features), high-intermediate risk
(three features), and high risk (four to fi ve features).
When applied to 2031 patients, these risk groups had
5-year survivals of 73%, 51%, 43%, and 26%, respectively.28 Age is a par ticularly important prognostic
marker, and has been repeatedly associated with poorer
out comes.29,30 However, elderly patients who are able to
receive full-dose chemotherapy have survival rates
similar to their younger counterparts.29,31 Since the
advent of the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab
(fi gure), the IPI has been revised for diff use large B-cell
lymphoma.32 The IPI for this lymphoma is still to be
validated in large prospective trials, but it seems to be a
legitimate prognostic method since the introduction of
rituximab, although it does not identify patients with
low survival prospects.32
Biological heterogeneity within diff use large B-cell
lymphoma is substantial, and gene expression profi ling
has identifi ed two broad subgroups: those of germinal
centre origin, known as germinal centre B cell-like
lymphomas (typically CD10+ and BCL6+); and those
arising from cells resembling activated B-cells (typically
IRF4/MUM1+/– and CD138+).33 This distinction has
clinical relevance, because the 5-year survival for the
germinal centre subgroup was 76% versus 16% for the
activated B-cell group.33 This distinction is still relevant in
the era of rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, vin cristine,
doxorubicin, and prednisolone (R-CHOP). An assessment of 153 patients given R-CHOP showed that both
subgroups showed increased survival compared with
historical controls treated with CHOP, but the germinal
centre subgroup had a 3-year overall survival of 86%
compared with 68% in the activated B-cell group.34
The IPI is less useful in follicular lymphoma, because
fewer patients present with high-risk disease, thus
prompting the evolution of the Follicular Lymphoma
International Prognostic Index (FLIPI).35 Three of the
fi ve prognostic variables are identical to those in the
IPI—namely, age, Ann Arbor stage, and serum lactate
dehydrogenase concentration. The two other prognostic
markers are haemoglobin concentration (<12 g/L vs
≥12 g/L) and number of nodal sites involved (>four vs
≤four). Patients are thus stratifi ed into one of three
prognostic groups: low (zero to one variable), intermediate (two variables), or high (three or more). These
groups have 10-year survivals of 71%, 51%, and 36%,
respectively.35 The FLIPI has yet to be prospectively
assessed in the rituximab era.
Treatment of B-cell lymphomas
Small B-cell lymphocytic lymphoma and chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia
Historically, small B-cell lymphocytic lymphoma and
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia were believed to be two
distinct diseases, but they are now considered to be
diff erent clinical manifestations of the same disease.
This non-Hodgkin lymphoma is mainly a disease of
elderly people, with a median age of 72 years at diagnosis
of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia in the USA. The
clinical course of this disease often begins with asymptomatic lymphocytosis, with about a quarter of patients
diagnosed after a routine blood count. Other common
presentations include painless lymphaden opathy and
hepatosplenomegaly. Several randomised trials have
com pared the effi cacy of chlorambucil with combination
chemotherapy including anthracycline-containing combina tions, but no survival advantage with combination
treatment was noted.36,37 The purine analogues cladribine
and particularly fl udarabine have activity against small
B-cell lymphocytic lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia.38–40 Findings from one large trial showed
an improvement in overall survival in patients with previously untreated chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
given fl udarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab
com pared with those given fl udarabine and cyclophosphamide alone.41 Bendamustine is an alter native
fi rst-line treat ment option for patients for whom
fl udarabine-con taining regimens are not appropriate.
Three monoclonal antibody therapies have been approved for use in small B-cell lymphocytic lymphoma
and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Rituximab is one,
but it has shown lower response rates in this disease
than in other B-cell lymphomas.41–43 Alemtuzumab, an
anti-CD52 monoclonal antibody (fi gure) is approved in
the USA and Europe as third-line therapy for cases of
small B-cell lymphocytic lymphoma and chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia that are fl udarabine refractory.44
In 2007, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
also approved alemtuzumab for previously untreated
cases of this disease.45 Ofatumumab, a human monoclonal antibody to the CD20 protein, has FDA approval
and conditional approval in Europe for the treatment of
refractory chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.46 Radiotherapy
can be used to palliate symptoms of bulky lymphadenopathy in this lymphoma subtype.
Follicular lymphoma
Follicular lymphoma is the second most common lymphoma in the USA and western Europe, accounting for
about 20% of all non-Hodgkin lymphomas.47 The median
age at diagnosis is 60 years.48 Follicular lymphoma often
presents with painless peripheral lymphadenopathy,
which may increase and decrease in size. Staging investigations usually identify disseminated disease, with
involvement of the spleen (in 40% of cases), liver (50%),
and bone marrow (60–70%).49 The clinical course can
vary—some patients might not need treat ment for several
years, whereas others have massive nodal or organ
involvement needing intervention. Follicular lymph oma
has traditionally been graded between 1 and 3 according
to the proportion of centroblasts present. However, the
clinical signifi cance of the division of grades 1 and 2 is
questionable, because clinical outcomes are similar. The
2008 WHO classifi cation therefore combines cases with
few centroblasts as follicular lymphoma grade 1–2 (low
grade). Grade 3 is subdivided into 3A and 3B according to
whether sheets of centro blasts are present (3B). In clinical
practice, the ability to separate grades 3A and 3B is a
histological challenge. Many oncologists treat all patients
with grade 3 follicular lymphoma in a manner similar to
those with diff use large B-cell lymphoma with R-CHOP.
However, this method is controversial, and others believe
that all patients with follicular lymphoma should be
treated in the same way irrespective of grade.
Historically, the median survival of patients presenting
with advanced stage follicular lymphoma was 10 years,
although since the inclusion of monoclonal antibody
treatment, survival seems to have increased.50,51 Histological transformation from follicular to a diff use
aggressive lymphoma occurs in 10–70% of cases, and is
associated with a poor prognosis.49,52
Despite the fact that prognosis is measured in years,
follicular lymphoma is not usually curable with conventional treatment. The exception is the few patients
who present with limited-stage disease (stage I or II),
who can be cured with radiotherapy, a few patients with
exceptional responses to initial chemo therapy regimens,
and some patients after autologous or allogeneic
haemopoietic stem-cell transplantation as second-line
therapy.53–55 When to begin treatment is a matter of
debate, with quality of life being a major determining
factor. No evidence suggests that immediate treatment of
asymptomatic patients improves their survival. Before
the introduction of rituximab, no therapy had been
shown to improve overall survival with advanced disease.
Some patients can be treated with rituximab alone. Other
treatment regimens include oral chlorambucil, fl udarabine, or bendamustine; or combin ation chemotherapies
with cyclophosphamide, vincris tine, and prednisolone;
or anthracycline-containing regimens such as CHOP. All
patients should receive rituximab as part of their initial
treatment for advanced stage follicular lymphoma, since
fi ndings from phase 3 randomised controlled trials have
shown improved overall survival with the addition of this
agent to chemo therapy.56–58 Maintenance rituximab after
induction prolongs remission duration,59–61 and future
analysis will establish whether this prolonged remission
translates into improved overall survival. Radiolabelled
monoclonal antibodies are being tested as part of
initial treatment regimens for follicular lymphoma.
⁹⁰Y-ibritumomab tiuxetan combines an anti-CD20
monoclonal antibody and localised yttrium-90 radiation
(fi gure). Its use as consolidation therapy after initial
induction chemo therapy has been favourably compared
with induction chemotherapy alone.62 ¹³¹I-tositumomab
is approved for use in the USA.
No convincing data exist that support myeloablative
chemotherapy and autologous stem-cell transplantation
in follicular lymphoma in fi rst remission.63,64 Palliative
radiotherapy might be useful in advanced disease, particularly to relieve pressure symptoms from a localised
mass, which might cause spinal cord or nerve root
compression, or other local symptoms.
Mantle-cell lymphoma
The median age at diagnosis of mantle-cell lymphoma
is 58 years. Most patients present with disseminated
lymphadenopathy, although gastrointestinal tract involvement is common and mantle-cell lymphoma is the most
common lymphoma to cause lymphomatous polyposis.
Occasionally patients will present with only blood and
bone marrow involvement, which can be confused with
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.
Although classifi ed as indolent, mantle-cell lymphoma
has one of the poorest prognoses of the various subtypes
of lymphoma.65 Most patients are symptomatic and need treatment at diagnosis, although a few are asymptomatic
and can be observed for a period without treatment.
Standard treatment is combination chemotherapy with or
without rituximab, and median overall survival is around
3 years. Studies assessing the addition of rituximab to
standard chemotherapy have shown signifi cant improvements in complete response rates and time-to-treatment
failure, but disappointingly this addition has not led to an
improvement in overall survival.66,67 Regimens incorporating high-dose cytarabine might lead to improved
outcomes.68 Several studies have assessed the role of highdose chemotherapy and autologous stem-cell transplantation in patients with mantle-cell lymphoma. The
extent of benefi t varies between studies, and at present
autologous stem-cell transplantation should not be
regarded as curative for mantle-cell lymphoma, because
late relapses are recorded.65 For the rare, young patient
with an HLA-matched donor, allogeneic haemo poietic
stem-cell transplantation can be curative.
Marginal-zone lymphoma
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma is the
third most common subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The most frequent site is the stomach, but these
extra nodal marginal-zone lymphomas can involve
almost any organ. Helicobacter pylori infection is
implicated in the pathogenesis of gastric mucosaassociated lymphoid tissue lymphoma, and remission
can be achieved with eradication of the bacteria in
many patients, although 30–40% of cases do not respond
to antibiotic therapy.69 Localised mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue lymph omas at all sites can sometimes
be eff ectively treated with radiotherapy or surgery.
Patients with disseminated disease usually respond to
rituximab alone or chemo therapy regimens incorporating rituximab. Patients with widespread marginalzone lymphoma involving the lymph nodes and bone
marrow are usually diagnosed with nodal marginalzone lymphoma and treated in a similar manner to
patients with follicular lymphoma. A rare subtype,
splenic marginal-zone lymphoma, involves the spleen,
blood, and bone marrow. This subtype has traditionally
been treated in the past with splenectomy, but rituximab
also seems to be eff ective.
Diff use large B-cell lymphoma
Diff use large B-cell lymphoma is the most common
subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, representing about a
third of cases. There are many subtypes of diff use large
B-cell lymphoma recognised in the WHO classifi cation
(panel). Mediastinal diff use large B-cell lymphoma presents
as a mediastinal mass and most often occurs in young
women. Plasmablastic diff use large B-cell lymphoma is a
histological variant that is frequently detected in patients
with HIV infection, and involves the head and neck. This
subtype does not usually express CD20 and, thus, does not
benefi t from treatment with rituximab.
Diff use large B-cell lymphoma is localised in about 25%
of patients. Before 1980, radiotherapy was given to the
aff ected region alone, but several trials in the early 1980s
compared radiation alone with radiation plus combination
chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and
prednisolone or CHOP.70,71 Findings from these trials
showed an improvement in overall survival for dual
modality therapy, which became the standard treatment.70–72 These studies all took place in the prerituximab
era. The MabThera International Trial of 824 patients
from 18 countries assessed the addition of rituximab to
CHOP chemotherapy versus CHOP chemotherapy alone,
with radiotherapy allowed in both groups. Trial
participants were young with a good disease prognosis,
although not all had localised disease. Patients who
received R-CHOP had an improved 3-year overall survival
compared with those randomly assigned to CHOP (93%
[95% CI 90–95] vs 84% [80–88]; log rank p=0·0001).73
Disseminated disease is the most common presentation of diff use large B-cell lymphoma, and in the prerituximab era more than a third of patients with this
form of the disease were cured with chemotherapy alone,
most by the CHOP regimen. Again, the most important
advance in treatment was the addition of rituximab to
chemotherapy. Findings from several randomised trials
have shown signifi cant increases in overall survival in
patients who received rituximab plus chemotherapy.73,74
A retrospective study in British Columbia, Canada,
compared outcomes of 140 patients given CHOP-like
chemotherapy in the prerituximab era with outcomes of
152 patients treated in the rituximab era. The addition of
rituximab to CHOP-like chemotherapy improved overall
survival at 2 years from 52% to 78%.75 Data from the
Surveillence, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
registry com paring survival in all patients with diff use
large B-cell lymphoma from 1973–2004 show that survival
has substantially improved since the advent of rituximab;
median overall survival for 1973–79 was 15 months,
1980–89 was 18 months, 1990–99 was 20 months, and
2000–04 was 47 months.76 The use of rituximab with
increasingly intensive chemotherapy regimens looks
promising and is being assessed in randomised trials.
About 30–40% of patients will relapse after fi rst-line
chemotherapy. Salvage chemotherapy regimens are used
in combination with rituximab, but rarely lead to
longlasting progression-free survival. These salvage
regimens are often used to achieve remission before the
use of high-dose chemotherapy and autologous stem-cell
transplantation. Because this subgroup includes a
hetero geneous mix of diseases with varied natural
histories, the future is likely to include diff erent primary
treatment protocols according to risk of relapse.
Burkitt’s lymphoma
Burkitt’s lymphoma occurs endemically in parts of
Africa, and sporadically around the world. Nowadays,
most patients with Burkitt’s lymphoma can be cured, but a shortage of access to health-care resources aff ects
outcomes in developing countries. Burkitt’s lymphoma
has a very high proliferation index, which makes prompt
diagnosis and initiation of therapy very important to
increase chances of survival. Principles of chemotherapy
delivery for Burkitt’s lymphoma include maintenance of
high dose intensity and the use of alternating noncrossresistant regimens to prevent the emergence of
drug resistance. Patients are at risk of CNS relapse, and
the use of high-dose methotrexate and cytarabine has
helped to reduce this risk.77
Treatment of T-cell lymphomas and precursor
B-cell or T-cell lymphomas
Lymphomas of mature T cells are much less common
than their B-cell counterparts. A few cutaneous T-cell
lymphomas, including mycosis fungoides, cutaneous
anaplastic large-cell lymphoma, and lymphomatoid
papulosis, are indolent. Other lymphomas of mature
T cells (often referred to as peripheral T-cell lymphomas)
are aggressive disorders. Some subtypes present rare
but interesting clinical syndromes and others (eg, adult
T-cell lymphoma and nasal NK-cell or T-cell lymphoma)
are common in east Asia but rare in western Europe
and North America.78 We discuss three subtypes that
are frequently seen in Europe and America: peripheral
T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specifi ed; angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma; and anaplastic largecell lymphoma.
Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specifi ed, is
the most common of the peripheral T-cell lymphomas
and is made up of a heterogeneous group of diseases that
are usually aggressive. These diseases often present in a
manner similar to that of diff use large B-cell lymphoma,
and a diagnosis is established only when the haematopathologist reviews the biopsy sample. Periph eral T-cell
lymphomas, not otherwise specifi ed, most commonly
present as nodal disease in elderly people, but can be
extranodal. Combination chemotherapy can achieve
long-term survival in 12–45% of patients.79,80 These neoplasms are often refractory to anthracyclines.78
Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma is the second
largest group of peripheral T-cell lymphomas and usually
presents with generalised lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, skin rash, and constitutional symptoms in
elderly patients. This lymphoma, which seems to arise
from follicular helper T cells, often harbours EpsteinBarr virus-infected B cells that can become monoclonal,
and occasionally patients develop diff use large B-cell
lymphoma simultaneously. Combination chemotherapy
with anthracycline-containing regimens has led to longterm survival in around a third of patients.81,82 Patients
with recurrent disease sometimes respond to immune
manipulations such as ciclosporin, and a few patients
seem to benefi t from transplantation.
Anaplastic large-cell lymphoma was fi rst described by
Stein and colleagues in 1985.83 Various subtypes have
subsequently been described, and overall it accounts for
3–8% of all lymphomas and 10–15% of all childhood
lymphomas.84 In North America, treatment is generally
the same as that used for diff use large B-cell lymphoma,
whereas in Europe, treatment varies, with some centres
mirroring American practice, and others using chemotherapy protocols that are longer.85–87 All anaplastic largecell lymphomas are CD30 positive. A subset of these
lymphomas harbour the t(2;5) translocation and overexpress anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK). These
patients are usually younger and have excellent prognosis
with a greater than 50% cure rate. Patients with so-called
ALK-negative anaplastic large-cell lymphoma have a better
outlook than do those with other subtypes of peripheral
T-cell lymphoma, but fewer than half will be cured.88 The
FDA has approved the antibody–drug conjugate brentuximab vedotin for the treatment of anaplastic large-cell
lymphoma. This agent combines the anti-CD30 monoclonal antibody brentuximab and the antitubulin agent
monomethyl auristatin E (vedotin)89 (fi gure).
Lymphoblastic lymphoma is a precursor B-cell or T-cell
lymphoma and the lymphomatous presentation of acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia. This rare subtype of lymph oma
is most often seen in children and young adults. Treatment
usually includes acute leukaemia-like regimens.90
Reassessment after treatment
PET scanning is more accurate than is CT scanning in
the reassessment of patients after completion of treatment because it can distinguish between residual tumour
and necrosis or fi brosis. Residual masses after therapy—
which are not rare in retroperitoneal and mediastinal
lymphomas—are frequently negative on PET scan.
Guidelines suggest that these patients should be classed as being in complete remission.91 Findings from
prospective studies have shown that PET correlates well
with patient outcome.92 PET has a positive predictive
value of around 85% in non-Hodgkin lymphoma.93–95
This value is higher than that for CT, which has a positive
predictive value in aggressive lymphoma of 40–50%.91
The negative predictive value of PET is about 85% across
studies.92–94 In practice, PET is a routine part of posttreatment assessment of patients with potentially curable
lymphoma because further therapy is often needed if
disease is residual—ideally, 6–8 weeks should pass from
the completion of treatment to the PET scan to reduce
the risk of a false-positive result.96
Future challenges
The opportunities to improve the treatment for patients
with non-Hodgkin lymphoma are encouraging. Im proved
use of PET might allow shortening of therapy for patients
with very sensitive lymphomas and changing or
intensifi cation of treatment for those with more resistant
disease. As understanding of the molecules or pathways
that are targeted by both old and new drugs improves,
regimens for individual patients will become available. A
focus of research on T-cell lymphomas, similar to that
applied during the past few decades for B-cell lymph omas,
might yield similar advances. A review of non-Hodgkin
lymphomas in 2022 will probably describe at least as
much improvement as has been seen in the past decade.
Contributors
All authors took part in the review of published work, the writing and
editing of the review, fi gure creation, and reference selection.
Confl icts of interest
JOA has been a consultant for Ziopharm, Seattle Genetics, Eisai,
GlaxoSmithKline, Allos Therapeutics, Genentech, and Roche.
BWH was, until 2009, taking part in studies done or supported by
Seattle Genetics, Roche, and Genentech. KRS declares that she has no
confl icts of interest. Adolescent non-Hodgkin lymphoma and Hodgkin lymphoma.Summary
Lymphoma is the most common malignancy among adolescents, accounting for >25% of newly diagnosed cancers in the 15–19 year age group. Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) accounts for the majority (two-thirds) of cases, while the remainder of patients have one of four subtypes of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL): diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) including primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL), Burkitt lymphoma (BL), lymphoblastic lymphoma (LL) or anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL). Epidemiology, histology, treatment and outcome differ between HL and NHL, as well as among the various subtypes of NHL. Adolescent lymphoma is particularly interesting because it often shares features with both childhood and adult lymphoma. As medical oncologists and paediatric oncologists often follow divergent treatment plans, disagreements may arise between practitioners as to how best treat the adolescent group. Additional complicating factors associated with the adolescent years, such as lack of insurance, issues pertaining to body image, and concerns about fertility, can also hinder prompt, appropriate medical management. This review details the complexities associated with the diagnosis and treatment of adolescent lymphoma and updates the state of the science, with particular emphasis on epidemiology, diagnosis, and proper management of HL and the various subtypes of NHL.

Adolescent lymphomas are a heterogeneous group of lymphoproliferative malignancies with differing patterns of behaviour and responses to treatment. The two main types include non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). The most recent US Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) data, which analysed the distribution of cancer in adolescents 15–19 years of age, indicate that malignant lymphomas make up 26% of all cancers in this age group (Fig 1; Bleyer et al, 2006). This is significantly higher than any other cancer that occurs in this age range.
Is There a Cure for Cancer? When you have cancer, or care about someone who does, “cure” may be the word you want to hear more than any other. It’s also a word most doctors won’t say.

Unlike other diseases, cancer has its own language: There’s no cure for it, but there are treatments that may be able to cure some people of some cancers.

When you understand the difference, it makes all the difference.Understanding Cancer
“Fruit” is a general term you use to cover many different kinds: apples, cranberries, pineapple and more.

Likewise, “cancer” is a catch-all word for more than 200 types, including cancers of the bladder, brain, breast, colon, eye, kidney, liver, lungs, ovaries, and skin.

When you have cancer, abnormal cells develop, divide, and destroy healthy tissue in your body. Some types grow slowly; others spread quickly. Each kind starts in a different part of your body and has its own grades, stages, and symptoms.

Because every kind of cancer is different, there’s no one-size-fits-all cure. But sometimes, people may say they are cured if their cancer seems to go away with treatment. But it’s not quite that simple.Cure vs. Cured vs. Remission
For centuries, doctors have used the word “cure” to describe a medical condition that’s completely gone and will never come back. For example, if you have appendicitis and doctors remove your appendix, you’ve been cured.

In the language of cancer, “cure” works differently.

Doctors can give you their best perspective, based on statistics from large groups of people, on whether or not your cancer will come back. But no doctor can guarantee that you’ll be cured.

There are two reasons for this:

Doctors don’t know everything about the disease yet.
Some cancer cells may remain somewhere in the body and can grow, divide, and become a new tumor. So doctors avoid saying you’re cured.
Instead of talking about “cures,” most medical professionals use the word “treatment.” If you have treatment, and your cancer doesn’t come back the rest of your life, you’re considered cured.

“Remission” is another key word. It means that your cancer symptoms have gone away. It’s different from a cure because remission doesn’t always last for the rest of your life.Treatment
There are no cures for any kinds of cancer, but there are treatments that may cure you.

Many people are treated for cancer, live out the rest of their life, and die of other causes. Many others are treated for cancer and still die from it, although treatment may give them more time: even years or decades.

Common types of cancer treatments include:

Surgery
Chemotherapy
Radiation
Bone marrow transplant
Immunotherapy
Hormone therapy
Targeted drug therapy
Clinical trials
Palliative care
Treatment plans are tailored to the type of cancer, how advanced it is, your overall health, and your preferences.

Progress, Not Perfection
In one form or another, cancer research has been underway for more than 200 years.

Though there’s not a cure, there has been a lot of progress. It may not feel fast enough when you have cancer. But there are more treatment options now than there were even 5 years ago.

Today doctors better understand how to find many cancers in the early stages. They also have more treatments to try if one doesn’t work.The more researchers learn about it, the more they understand how different one kind of cancer is from the other.

For example, scientists have learned that breast cancers aren’t all the same. There are four main types, and each has specific treatments.

Cancer researchers are looking into things like what causes specific kinds of cancer to grow so they can develop treatments to stop it. This includes drugs that attack the way a cancer cell works, and treatments that use your body’s immune system to target cancer cells.

In doctor-speak, there’s been a dramatic improvement in outcomes. This means fewer people are dying from cancer, but there’s still no cure for it.

What About Natural or Alternative Treatments?
Until medical professionals find a cure for cancer, it’s smart to consider every treatment that might save your life or make you feel better, safely. And to discuss all your options with your doctor.

Whether it’s a medical, natural, or alternative treatment, ask these questions:

What data can you show me that this treatment works?
What is the expected benefit of this treatment?
What is the expected downside of this treatment?
Will this help me live a longer life?
Will this help me live the rest of my life comfortably?
What is the likelihood that this treatment will actually cure me?
Is this treatment approved by the FDA?If it sounds too good to be true, it probably is.

Consider the source: Is this treatment promoted through a trustworthy outlet, like a national cancer magazine or organization? Or is it a miracle cure advertisement you saw on social media?

Any device, pill, powder, cream, tea, oil, or kit that claims to treat cancer is supposed to be approved or cleared by the FDA. But there are bogus products out there.

Watch out for these red flags:

One treatment that claims to cure any or many kinds of cancer
Personal stories instead of facts and data
Phrases like “all natural” and “miracle cure”
Claims that its more effective than chemotherapy
No “alternative” or natural cancer treatments have been proven to cure cancer. But there are some safe non-medical treatments -- like acupuncture, massage, meditation, and yoga -- that help offset side effects like fatigue, nausea, and pain.

Therapies that you do in addition to regular cancer care are called “complementary” or “integrative” practices. It’s always best to tell your doctor first, especially if you’re considering supplements. You’ll want your doctor to check on what’s safe for you to try.Cancer Incidence Rates by AgeYou’re more likely to get cancer as you get older. In fact, age is the biggest risk factor for the disease. More than nine out of 10 cancers are diagnosed in people 45 and older. Seniors older than 74 make up almost 28% of all new cancer cases.

Researchers aren’t sure why this is so. It could be that the passing decades give your cells more time to turn faulty, or mutate, and grow into cancer. Or older age simply means you’ve been exposed to sunlight, cigarette smoke, chemicals, and other cancer-causing agents for longer.

Cancer Incidence
This is another way of saying the number of new cancer cases in a certain group of people. In the U.S., the number of new cancer cases per year has been falling slowly for more than a decade. Incidence rates give an important but incomplete picture of cancer. For example, cancer incidence can go up if more people are getting screened. Such was the case during the early 1990s, when incidences of prostate cancer in men surged after widespread testing.

An estimated 1.81 million people in the U.S. are expected to be diagnosed with cancer in 2020. About 606,000 people are expected to die from any type of cancer. Cancer death rates have improved steadily since the early 1990s.

About four out of 10 Americans will have cancer at some point in their lifetime.Cancer Cases by Age Groups
You can get cancer at any age, including as infants and toddlers. But cancer is mostly a disease of middle age and beyond. The median age at diagnosis is 66, meaning that half of all new cases are found before then and half are diagnosed later.Cancer Types by Age
The link between cancer and age can differ by types of cancer. For example, the most common cancers found in kids 14 and younger are leukemia, lymphoma, or cancer of the brain or central nervous system. More than one in four people diagnosed with bone cancer are under 20.The risk of many cancers rises in tandem with age. One out of 870 women aged 40 will get ovarian cancer within in 10 years. For 80-year-olds, the chances are three times higher, or one out of 283 women.

Some common cancers in adults under age 50 include:

Leukemia and lymphoma
Thyroid cancer
Melanoma
Breast cancer
Germ cell tumors
Some of the most common cancers in adults over 50 include melanoma and cancers of the:

Breast
Lung
Prostate
Colon
Bladder
The risk of many cancers rises in tandem with age. One out of 870 women aged 40 will get ovarian cancer within in 10 years. For 80-year-olds, the chances are three times higher, or one out of 283 women.

Some common cancers in adults under age 50 include:

Leukemia and lymphoma
Thyroid cancer
Melanoma
Breast cancer
Germ cell tumors
Some of the most common cancers in adults over 50 include melanoma and cancers of the:

Breast
Lung
Prostate
Colon
Bladder
Cancer Rates and Statistics: What Do They Mean?Cancer rates and statistics tell you how the disease affects others. They look at how many and what kind of people get a certain type of cancer, and how they respond to treatment.

Health and government experts study these numbers to understand cancer’s impact on society. This helps them develop ways to better control and manage the disease.

Doctors also use statistics to make predictions, like your risk of getting cancer and beating the disease. Although they can’t see what’s in store for your personal future, they can make an educated guess based on other people who’ve had the same cancer.How Are These Numbers Gathered?
They’re recorded in databases called cancer registries. When you’re diagnosed with cancer, a specially trained person called a cancer registrar enters your details into a computer system. This includes your age, race, ethnicity, tumor size, and treatments.Many hospitals have their own registries. Their data is used in national registries, like those from the CDC and the National Cancer Institute. These are called population-based registries. They don’t include your name, address, or other personal information. Each year, this information is combined into the United States Cancer Statistics.

What Are Some Common Statistics and Rates?
Incidence rate. This is the number of new cases of a specific cancer in a certain population in 1 year. To get the rate, you divide the number of new cases by the number of that population. Then you multiply the result by a specific number of people. For cancer, that’s typically 100,000. For example, there are about 1.7 million new cases of cancer in the United States. The incidence rate is 439 per 100,000 people.Many hospitals have their own registries. Their data is used in national registries, like those from the CDC and the National Cancer Institute. These are called population-based registries. They don’t include your name, address, or other personal information. Each year, this information is combined into the United States Cancer Statistics.

What Are Some Common Statistics and Rates?
Incidence rate. This is the number of new cases of a specific cancer in a certain population in 1 year. To get the rate, you divide the number of new cases by the number of that population. Then you multiply the result by a specific number of people. For cancer, that’s typically 100,000. For example, there are about 1.7 million new cases of cancer in the United States. The incidence rate is 439 per 100,000 people.Lifetime risk. This is the chance you’ll get or die from a certain cancer. It’s given as a percentage or ratio. For example, women have a 13% risk -- 1 in 8 -- of getting breast cancer at some point in their life.

Survival rate. These statistics tell you what percentage of people live with cancer for a specific amount of time. Survival statistics are based on hundreds or thousands of people who have a certain kind of cancer. They may include people of all ages and health conditions. Some survival rates are narrowed by age or stages of cancer. The ones you’re most likely to see are:

Five-year survival rate. This is the number people who are alive 5 years after they were diagnosed or started treatment for a certain kind of cancer. It’s usually given as a percentage. Survival rates can also be broken into other time frames, like 1 or 10 years. But 5-year survival rates are the most common.
Overall survival rate. This is the percentage of people who haven’t died of any cause after a certain time. It includes those who are still getting treatment, as well as those who are cancer-free.
Relative survival rate. This is the percentage of people who haven’t died of a specific cancer after a certain time. It doesn’t include people who died of other diseases. Like overall survival, it includes people who are and aren’t cancer-free.
Disease-free survival rate. This is the length of time people live after a cancer treatment without any signs or symptoms. It’s often used to see how well a new treatment works. You might hear it called recurrence-free or progression-free survival.How Do Statistics Guide Treatment?
Your prognosis, or outlook, is an estimate of how your cancer will unfold. Doctors use statistics to predict your chances of beating the disease and if it’ll come back. Along with your cancer type and stage, the doctor will also factor in your age and overall health.

Statistics can also help you and your doctor choose a treatment plan. They can show you how other people with your same cancer type and stage responded to treatments.What Are the Limits?
Statistics are based on large groups. While they can give you an idea of what happens to most people, they can’t predict your future. You may respond to treatment differently than someone else.

What’s more, some statistics don’t include important factors, like your cancer type, age, and overall health. For example, if you’re in perfect health, you may have a greater chance of surviving than what the numbers suggest. Ask your doctor if there are more specific numbers, or if they can make a better guess based on your circumstances.

What Are the Limits?
Statistics are based on large groups. While they can give you an idea of what happens to most people, they can’t predict your future. You may respond to treatment differently than someone else.

What’s more, some statistics don’t include important factors, like your cancer type, age, and overall health. For example, if you’re in perfect health, you may have a greater chance of surviving than what the numbers suggest. Ask your doctor if there are more specific numbers, or if they can make a better guess based on your circumstances.

Abnormal Growths?If you hear this term, your doctor could be talking about many things, from a polyp in your colon to a tumor. An abnormal growth can be benign, which is cancer-free. Or it may be malignant, meaning it has cancer cells. It can also be "precancerous" -- it could turn into cancer.

Adjuvant Therapy?A treatment you have in addition to your main treatment to lower the chances of the cancer coming back. Sometimes, your doctor will recommend something before your main treatment to help make it more effective. That's called neoadjuvant therapy.Angiogenesis Inhibitors?In order to grow and spread, cancer needs a blood supply. These specially designed drugs stop new blood vessels from forming and carrying blood to the tumor. The drugs may not kill the tumor, but they could stop the cancer from moving to other parts of your body.Antiemetic?A medicine that helps prevent or ease queasiness and vomiting, common side effects of some cancer treatments. Your doctor may prescribe more than one drug. It's usually pills taken right before or after your treatment. If you're in the hospital, you may get the medicine directly in a vein.Biologic Therapy?A treatment that uses a product made from a living source, such as human or animal cells or a microorganism. Some types attack specific cancer cells. Others affect your immune system (revving it up or making it less active) or ease some cancer side effects. Biologic therapies include immunotherapy, gene therapy, and certain targeted treatments.Biomarker?Your doctor may order a test to look for certain substances in your blood, other body fluids, or tissues. What they're searching for are called biomarkers or tumor markers. They're usually made by cancer cells. They can help your doctor figure out the best treatments for you, how you're responding to treatment, or if your cancer has spread or come back.Biopsy?A small sample of tissue or cells your doctor takes from you to look at under a microscope. They might use a needle (the size depends on what part of your body is getting the biopsy) or a thin, flexible tube designed to hold special tools. The procedure usually hurts very little since they'll numb the area first.Brachytherapy?This type of radiation treatment gets put inside or very near a cancerous tumor. Your doctor will use tools such as needles, seeds, or wires to put the radioactive material in the right spot. You may also hear this procedure called implant or internal radiation therapy.Carcinogen?A substance that can raise your odds of developing cancer. There are many. Tobacco smoke is one example. So are asbestos and ultraviolet sunlight. The likelihood you'll get cancer because you were around a carcinogen depends on many different things, including how long you were in contact with it as well as your genes.Chemotherapy?You've probably heard of this cancer treatment. It kills cancer cells or stops them from growing using strong medicine -- one drug or a combination of them. You usually get "chemo" as an outpatient at a hospital or clinic or in your doctor's office. It's usually injected, but sometimes chemo drugs are swallowed or put onto your skin.Clinical Trial?Doctors use research studies to gather data about how new medicines or treatments work in specific groups of people. Some trials look at how well new ways of diagnosing or testing work. The studies can last several years, and they have strict controls.Consolidation Therapy?After you've finished your main leukemia or lymphoma treatment and tests don't show any cancer in your body, your doctor may recommend more treatment to kill any lingering cancer cells. Chemo and radiation are two examples of this.Cycle?The time between the start of one round of treatment, like chemotherapy, and the start of the next round. The break lets your body rest and recover."-ectomy"?A word that ends with "-ectomy" refers to surgery that takes out some or all of a body part. For example, in a mastectomy, the surgeon removes breast tissue. An oophorectomy takes out an ovary. A nephrectomy removes a kidney. As a cancer treatment the surgeon will remove cancer cells along with some or all of the body part.Grade?A description of how a tumor looks under a microscope. This will give your doctor an idea of how quickly the tumor may grow and spread. That, in turn, help them plan your treatment. Low grade means the cells have changes that suggest they're slow-growing. High-grade tumors may spread more quickly. Different cancers have different grading systems.
Hormone Therapy?Some cancers, like breast or prostate cancer, need certain hormones to grow. This treatment blocks those hormones or changes the way they act in your body. It may slow or stop cancer from spreading, ease your symptoms, or help prevent the cancer from coming back. It's usually used with other treatments. You may get injections or take pills at home, in your doctor's office, or a clinic or hospital.Imaging?This generic term refers to several tests that take pictures of your body's organs and structures. One example is a mammogram, which uses X-rays to look for breast cancer. Other technologies use a magnetic field or radio waves. Tests include CT, MRI, PET scan, and ultrasound.Infusion?The process of giving a dose of chemotherapy, which can last hours. The drugs usually go directly into a vein. So you don't have to get stuck with needles over and over, you'll probably get a flexible tube called a catheter put through your skin, or a small disc called a port put under your skin. These hook up to an IV tube. They won't be taken out until your treatment is done.Lymphedema?Swelling in your arms or legs can happen when fluid builds up. It's possible after your lymph nodes are damaged or removed as part of your cancer treatment. Lymphedema can't be cured, but you can take steps to manage it.Metastasize?Sometimes cancer spreads from one part of the body to another. For example, cancer that started in the lung can spread, or metastasize, to the liver, bones, or brain. Those cancer cells will be the same as the ones in the lung, not like cancer cells that started in the new body part.Monoclonal Antibodies?These drugs use your immune system to fight cancer. They bind to the surface of cancer cells or specific immune system cells so your body can do a better job of finding and stopping the cancer. They can also help radiation and chemo treatments target cancer cells and avoid healthy ones.Neutropenia?A condition where your body doesn't have enough infection-fighting white blood cells. It can be a side effect of cancer treatment.Neuropathy?This nerve problem causes tingling, numbness, weakness, or swelling. It usually starts in your arms and legs. Cancer treatment or the cancer itself can bring it on. (So can diabetes and other diseases, infections, and injuries.)"-oma"?The ending "-oma" means tumor or swelling, and the first part of the word tells you what kind of cell it's in. For example, carcinoma is a cancer that starts in your skin or the lining of your organs. Sarcomas begin in connective tissue like bone, fat, and blood vessels. Lymphoma and myeloma are cancer in your immune system. Glioblastoma is a tumor in the central nervous system.Oncology?The branch of medicine that focuses on the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. Cancer doctors are called oncologists. They may specialize in different ways to treat cancer.Palliative Therapy?A system of support and comfort to improve your quality of life. It brings together experts in different fields to help you with pain and symptom management, and the mental, emotional, and spiritual effects of cancer. It can begin as soon as you're diagnosed and continue throughout your treatment, as well as afterward and if the cancer comes back. It also includes end-of-life care.Protocol?A detailed plan for treatment based on guidelines accepted by experts. "Protocol" could also refer to a clinical trial. In that case, it will outline things like who is eligible, how data will be collected, and the goals of the study.Radiation Therapy?This common treatment uses energy like X-rays and gamma rays to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. Sometimes a machine will direct radiation from outside your body toward the cancer. Or your doctor may put radioactive needles, seeds, or wires inside you near the cancer. You could get radiation as your only treatment or as part of a treatment plan with other therapies.Stage?A way doctors describe your cancer. It's based on things like:

The cancer's location and size
The type of cell affected
The grade, or how abnormal it looks
Whether it has spread to lymph nodes or other organs
Different cancers have different staging systems.Tumor?An abnormal mass of tissue or swelling. Your doctor may also call it a "neoplasm." Not all tumors are cancer.Tips to Avoid Germs When You Have CancerTips to Avoid Germs When You Have Cancer Squirt a Sanitizer
Soap and water are best for rinsing away bacteria and viruses. Alcohol-based hand sanitizers don’t work as well to get rid of certain microbes, such as norovirus. But they kill the new coronavirus. Just make sure it has at least 60% alcohol. Squirt a quarter-sized dollop and rub it all over your hands for about 20 seconds. Take care not to wipe it off before your hands dry.Wear a Mask
It’s best to stay home when you have cancer, especially during a pandemic. But if you must go out, always put on a mask. Wear disposable gloves, too. Avoid restaurants, hair salons, and anywhere where people can gather. If possible, ask a loved one to do your grocery shopping, or have it delivered.Keep a Distance From Others, Especially If They’re Sick
It may seem like a no-brainer: Don’t go near anyone with a cold, flu, or other infectious illnesses. Ask everyone to keep at least 6 feet away. Droplets from a sneeze can travel 6 feet or farther. Ask anyone who is sick to cough or sneeze into the crook of their elbow. Better yet, visit another time when they’ve recovered.Travel With Care
You may have to leave home regularly for immunotherapy or another cancer treatment. Pack your disinfecting wipes. If you take a cab, a flight, or another form of public transportation, swab down the tray table, window shade, door handle, and other surfaces you may touch. Ask your airline how closely the passengers will sit. If possible, ask for an empty seat next to you.Bypass the Buffet
The Sunday brunch buffet may look delicious. But it’s safer to order off the menu. Food often sits for a long time on buffets and salad bars, so germs can get a chance to grow. Diners who pass through the line may have unwashed hands or even be sick. One study found that E. coli can spread easily from germy hands to metal salad bar tongs and from dirty tongs to hands.Fishy Fish
It’s best to steer clear of raw or undercooked seafood. That includes sushi, sashimi, oysters, clams, and the like. Fish and shellfish can harbor salmonella as well as Vibrio vulnificus, a bacteria that lives in warm seawater. Cancer can make you more susceptible to food poisoning. Dousing your raw seafood with hot sauce or alcohol won’t kill the germs.Cook It Done
A rule of thumb is to cook fish until 145 F on the inside. Prepare shellfish until it’s opaque. You’ll know clams, oysters, and mussels are done when their shells open.

Cook chicken and other poultry to 165 F. Whole cuts of beef and pork should reach 145 F. But ground meat should be cooked to at least 160 F since bacteria could have gotten inside.Be Careful With Cheese
A process called pasteurization uses heat to kill germs in dairy foods. Soft cheeses like brie, Camembert, feta, goat cheese, and queso fresco or blanco are made with unpasteurized milk and can put you at risk for food poisoning. Steer clear of “raw” milk or yogurt products, too.Wash Fresh Produce
If your immune system is very weak, your doctor may tell you to avoid fresh fruits and veggies because they can harbor germs and make you sick. If you can eat produce, wash it well, especially leafy greens like kale, which can hide dirt. Rinse bananas and oranges first so you won’t contaminate the inside when you peel or cut the rind. Avoid raw or lightly cooked sprouts, which are grown in warm, humid conditions that can invite germs.Pass on Pet Poop
Don’t clean up after pets, babies, or other people if possible. Poop literally teems with germs. A trillion of them can pack into just 1 gram of human stool. If you have to do this dirty job, put on rubber gloves and wash your hands right after taking them off. Avoid backyard dirt that may have been soiled by animal droppings.Pass on Pet Poop
Don’t clean up after pets, babies, or other people if possible. Poop literally teems with germs. A trillion of them can pack into just 1 gram of human stool. If you have to do this dirty job, put on rubber gloves and wash your hands right after taking them off. Avoid backyard dirt that may have been soiled by animal droppings.Take Care With Cuts
Even the smallest wound can make way for germs. Here’s how to avoid cuts and nicks:

Use an electric shaver, not a razor blade.
Use chef’s gloves when using knives or graters.
Wear shoes outside and inside your home to protect your feet.
Wash cuts with soap and water, slather on a light layer of antibacterial ointment, and cover with a clean bandage. Tell your doctor if you see any sign of infection like swelling, redness, or pus.Skip the Nail Salon
A relaxing mani-pedi may sound like just what the doctor ordered. But hold off on a salon or spa visit for now. Dirty nail clippers and nippers can infect you if you get nicked. Bacteria and fungi can grow in pedicure foot baths if they’re not cleaned well. Even a tiny break in your skin can lead to an infection.Skip the Nail Salon
A relaxing mani-pedi may sound like just what the doctor ordered. But hold off on a salon or spa visit for now. Dirty nail clippers and nippers can infect you if you get nicked. Bacteria and fungi can grow in pedicure foot baths if they’re not cleaned well. Even a tiny break in your skin can lead to an infection.Get Your Shots
A weakened immune system means you may be at greater risk for the flu or complications like pneumonia. Get vaccinated every fall. Encourage your family, friends, and caregivers to do so, too. You might need other vaccines to ward off infections, such as COVID-19. Talk to your doctor about which ones are safe for you.Ask About Antibiotics
Talk to your cancer doctor before taking any antibiotics, especially if you’re about to start immunotherapy. A recent small study showed that people who took antibiotics within a month of starting treatment with drugs called immune checkpoint inhibitors didn’t fare as well on treatment as those who didn’t take antibiotics.Guide to Oral Cancer.
What Is It?Oral cancer affects the lips, gums, tongue, roof of the mouth, insides of the cheeks, or the soft floor of the mouth under the tongue. It’s called “oropharyngeal” when it affects your tonsils, upper throat, or soft palate, where the roof of the mouth meets your throat.What Are the Symptoms?You may not notice any. But the most common one is a sore inside your cheek or lip that won’t heal. You might feel a lump or see a patch of red or white in your mouth. Other signs are mouth numbness, pain, bleeding, or weakness, as well as voice changes, ear ringing, and a sore throat that won’t go away. Teeth or dentures might get loose for no clear reason. But these also could be signs of less serious problems. Tell your doctor if you notice any symptoms so they can help you figure out the cause.

Who Gets It?Women and people older than 45 are more likely to get oral cancer, though it can happen at any age. Those with fair skin are more likely to get cancer of the lip. And some studies show that people with weaker immune systems, which happens with age or a long-term illness like HIV, get oral cancers more often.Tobacco Use
Almost 90% of those who get cancer of the head or neck, including oral cancer, use tobacco or spend time around secondhand smoke. The form doesn’t matter -- it could be cigarettes, cigars, snuff, or chewing tobacco. Pipes may be special offenders, particularly in the area where the lips meet the pipe stem. People who use marijuana may also be more likely to get the disease.
Alcohol and Oral Cancer

Booze can raise your odds for the disease, specifically if you drink a lot (more than a drink or two in a day) on a regular basis. And if you use tobacco as well, your odds go up more, especially after age 50. 


A Link to HPV?

You typically get human papillomavirus (HPV) through sex, including oral sex. There are many types of the virus, some closely linked to cancer. There is some evidence that the infection leads to cancer at the base of the tongue or in the tonsils. A vaccine for HPV may protect against the types that cause oral cancer, but scientists don’t know for sure. To lower the chances you’ll get the virus, use condoms or dental dams each time you have sex.
A Link to HPV?

You typically get human papillomavirus (HPV) through sex, including oral sex. There are many types of the virus, some closely linked to cancer. There is some evidence that the infection leads to cancer at the base of the tongue or in the tonsils. A vaccine for HPV may protect against the types that cause oral cancer, but scientists don’t know for sure. To lower the chances you’ll get the virus, use condoms or dental dams each time you have sex.Biopsy

It’s often the only sure way to know whether a lump is cancer. Your doctor removes a small piece of tissue to send to a lab for testing. They might use a needle, a scraping tool, or do minor surgery to cut out a piece of tissue. Your dentist might use a simpler method at first: a small brush to gather cells from a suspicious spot. In this case, if the lab finds cancer, you’ll need a more traditional biopsy to confirm it. HPV Test9/13
Your doctor could also test the biopsy tissue for HPV. The result helps your doctor figure out the extent of your cancer and the best treatment options. People with cancers linked to this virus tend to do better than those with other types of cancer.

Imaging Tests

Doctors can use different tests to look at the organs and structures in and around your mouth. They include X-rays, MRI, CT scans, ultrasound, and PET scans. By themselves, they can’t diagnose your cancer, but your doctor might use one or more of them to look for a tumor, see how well treatment is working, or check if cancer has come back. 
Treatments: Surgery

It’s often the first treatment doctors try, especially when your disease is in the early stages. Your doctor will try to remove the tumor as well as an area, or margin, of tissue around it to be sure that all the cancer cells are gone. In some cases, this could mean cutting out part of the tongue, jawbone, or roof of the mouth. You may need more surgery later on to make those areas look and work well again. 
Treatments: Radiation and Chemo

Radiation uses high-energy particles to kill cancer cells or slow their growth. In chemotherapy, drugs in the form of pills or injections travel through your bloodstream to target cancer cells. You might get one or both treatments, depending on the type of cancer and how long you’ve had it. Even if you have surgery, you may need one or both of these treatments to help ensure cancer doesn’t return.
Can You Prevent It?

A few basic health habits can lower your chances of getting oral cancer.

Stay out of the sun. Too much is linked to lip cancer. Cover up with hats and sunscreen of SPF 15 or higher.
Don’t use tobacco, and limit the alcohol you drink.
Brush, floss, and go to the dentist regularly. It makes you less likely to get cancer, and it also helps you catch it early when it’s easier to treat.
Eat a healthy diet with plenty of vegetables and fruits. A lack of vitamin A -- found in oily fish, milk, eggs, spinach, carrots, and beef liver -- could lead to certain oral cancers.Lower Your Risk of Oral Cancer.Go Heavy on Fruits and Veggies
1/14
A lack of nutrients can lead to changes in your mouth that make cancer more likely. But vitamins and antioxidants in fruits and veggies rev up your immune system, and that helps protect you. So get at least 5 servings of them a day and mix them up for plenty of variety. Carrots, Brussels sprouts, and squash are especially good for your mouth.Cook Smarter

To get the most bang for your fruit-and-veggie buck, don’t cook all the cancer-fighting goodness out of them. Enjoy some of them raw to get the full effect. When you do cook them, stop when they get tender and still have some life in them. Also, cooking oils can form cancer-causing substances at high heat. So instead of frying, it’s a better idea to bake, boil, broil, or steam your food.

Use Sun Protection.

Too much time in the sun doesn’t just raise your chances of skin cancer, it’s also a problem for your lips. If you can, stay out of direct sunlight in the middle of the day -- that’s when it’s strongest. When you do go out, wear a hat with a wide brim that shades your whole face. Use lip balm with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 15, and put it on often. And stay away from tanning beds.
Cut Down on Alcohol.

Heavy drinking over the years irritates your mouth in ways that can set you up for oral cancer. You’re twice as likely to get it if you have 3 to 4 drinks a day. And your odds skyrocket if you both smoke and drink heavily. So if you do drink, keep it in check with just one a day for women or two for men.
Lower Your Risk of HPV.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of very common viruses. You can have it in your mouth and not know it. That’s because most of the time, it doesn’t cause any issues. But in some people, it can lead to changes that cause cancer. There’s a vaccine for HPV, but it works best if you get it before you're sexually active. If you already are, you can protect yourself by limiting your number of partners and practicing safe sex.
Keep Up With Dentist Visits.
Dentists don’t just polish your teeth, fill cavities, and get on your case about flossing. They check everything from the bottom of your tongue to the inside of your cheeks for growths that might lead to cancer. They’re on the front lines to catch any problems early on, which can make things easier to treat. See your dentist at least once a year.
Give Your Mouth a Monthly Check.

Between dental visits, it’s up to you to keep an eye on things. Once a month, get in front of a mirror and open up wide. Look for ulcers or unusual red or white patches that stick around for 3 weeks or longer. Check the roof and floor of your mouth, your tongue, your gums, and the inside of your cheeks and lips. If you find anything you’re not sure about, see your dentist.
Quit Smoking.

This is the best thing you can do for your mouth, and the rest of your body, too. The more and longer you smoke -- cigarettes, cigars, or pipes -- the higher your risk. But even if you’ve been at it for a long time, stopping now helps. If you do get cancer, quitting means your treatment will work better, you’ll heal faster, and it’ll be less likely to come back. And if you don’t smoke, don’t start.
Stay Away From Secondhand Smoke.

Just like with lung cancer, you need to watch out for tobacco even if you don’t smoke. When you spend time around people who do, your odds of oral cancer go up, too. And the longer you’re around it, the higher your risk. There’s no safe level of secondhand smoke.
Ditch the Chew.

There’s no healthy way to use tobacco. Like smoking, there are benefits to quitting chew or snuff, even if you’ve used it for a long time. Your mouth will thank you for other reasons, too. You’re more likely to keep all your teeth and avoid gum disease.
Don’t Use Betel Quid.

Popular in Southeast Asia and some other parts of the world, you chew this mix of betel leaf, areca nut, and lime. When you add tobacco to it, it’s called gutka. Either way, it’s best to avoid it. With or without tobacco, it’s been clearly linked to oral cancer. 
Are Dentures an Issue?

One school of thought says dentures that don’t fit well, or sharp or crooked teeth, can irritate your mouth, and that may raise your odds for oral cancer. But there’s no clear proof of that. We do know that people who wear dentures aren’t at higher risk. It’s still best to make sure your dentures fit well and that any dental work you have done isn’t bothering your mouth.
Can Brushing and Flossing Help?

Brush at least twice a day and floss at least once a day because it’s just good for oral health. One study seemed to show a link between good oral health and preventing HPV, which would lower your chances of having oral cancer. But the results of the study were limited, and it was only a first look. More research is needed to figure out how strong the connection.
Is Mouthwash a Problem?

The jury’s still out. Some studies seem to show that mouthwash that has a lot of alcohol could raise your chances for oral cancer. But it’s hard to know for sure because people who drink and smoke also tend to use mouthwash more. That makes it tough to tell if there’s a clear link. The American Dental Association says mouthwash may help people over 6 because it can go where a toothbrush can’t. Use one that has the ADA Seal of Acceptance.
Side Effects of Treatments For Follicular Lymphoma.Follicular Lymphoma Treatments.
Follicular lymphoma treatments destroy cancer cells, but in the process, they can cause side effects. Treatment affects everyone differently. How you feel depends on the type of treatment, the dose, and your health. Most people with this cancer will have radiation, chemotherapy, immunotherapy, or a combination of these treatments. Ask your doctor what to expect, and how to feel more comfortable if you do have side effects.
Nausea and Vomiting.
Chemotherapy, radiation, and immunotherapy can cause nausea and vomiting, but not in everyone. If you have these side effects, your doctor can prescribe anti-nausea medication. Ask about acupuncture and meditation, which may help you feel better. Drink extra water and other fluids to stay hydrated. And tell your doctor if you have trouble keeping food down.
Fatigue.
Treatments like chemotherapy and radiation -- and the cancer itself -- can leave you exhausted, no matter how much you sleep. Tell your treatment team if you feel extra tired. Your doctor may do blood tests to look for causes, like a change in your hormone levels or a low red blood cell count, called anemia. Exercise, diet, and therapy are ways to relieve fatigue.
Hair Loss.
This is a common side effect of chemotherapy and radiation, but it doesn't happen to everyone. You may choose to cut your hair short or shave your head to make the hair loss harder to see. You can also cover it with a scarf or wig. One way to reduce the amount you lose is to be gentle when you brush or wash your hair. Your hair should grow back after you finish treatment, though it might be a different texture than it was before.
Infections.
Chemotherapy can cause a drop in the white blood cells your immune system needs to fight germs, making you more likely to get sick. Your doctor might give you antibiotics to prevent infections, or drugs called growth factors to help you make more white blood cells. To stay healthy, wash your hands often and avoid people who are sick. Call your doctor right away if you have signs of an infection like a fever, sore throat, or chills.
Diarrhea.
Loose, watery stools are a side effect of cancer and treatments like chemotherapy and radiation that can damage the intestine lining. Diarrhea should stop when your treatment finishes. Drink water, clear broth, or sports drinks to replace the fluid you lose. Stick to a diet of rice, toast, applesauce, bananas, and other bland foods until you feel better. Ask your doctor if you should take an over-the-counter anti-diarrhea medicine.
Bruising and Bleeding.
Chemo and radiation damage platelets, the cells that help your blood clot when you get hurt. Signs of low platelets are nosebleeds, bleeding gums, unexplained bruises, heavy periods, and red or black poop. Your platelet count should go back up on its own, but tell your doctor about it. If it drops too low, you may need a platelet transfusion to stop you from bleeding too much. To prevent cuts, use a soft toothbrush and an electric razor.
Dry, Itchy, or Red Skin.
Itching, dryness, and a rash are all common after chemotherapy and radiation, which can irritate the skin. You may also be more sensitive to the sun. Rubbing on a gentle, water-based cream after you take a bath or shower can ease dryness. Drink extra fluids to keep your skin hydrated. Ask your doctor about prescribing an antihistamine to help with the itch. When you go outdoors, put on sunscreen with an SPF of 30 or higher.
Sore Mouth.
Lymphoma treatments can damage cells inside your mouth and cause sores, which may be painful. They should heal once you finish treatment. Ask your doctor if you should rinse with baking soda or salt water to curb the pain. There are also special mouthwashes and medicines to treat mouth pain. While you heal, foods that are soft or cold may be more comfortable to eat. Avoid anything spicy or acidic, like orange or lemon juice.
Numbness and Tingling.
Some chemotherapy drugs damage the nerves that help you move and feel sensations. If you have nerve damage, called peripheral neuropathy, you may have burning or tingling, numbness, or weakness in parts of your body. Tell your doctor about these symptoms. Lowering the dose of your medicine might help. Numbing medicines, anti-seizure drugs, physical therapy, and acupuncture are some of the treatments for nerve pain.
Chemo Brain.
You may have some trouble remembering, learning new things, or staying focused on tasks during treatment. Some people call this mental fogginess "chemo brain." Chemotherapy is one cause, but radiation and other treatments can add to memory problems. Be patient with yourself. Keep track of to-do lists in a daily planner or with sticky notes. Keep your mind active by doing crossword puzzles and other mentally stimulating activities.
Sleep Problems.
It's normal to have trouble sleeping when you have cancer. Pain, nausea, and your worries can keep you up at night. Because there are many causes of sleep problems, you may see a few specialists, including your doctor and a therapist. Go over the medications you take with your doctor in case any of them are keeping you awake. Exercise every day to boost sleep naturally. And avoid caffeine and alcohol before bed.
What You Need to Know About Polyps.
What’s a Polyp?

It’s a small clump of cells that grows inside your body. There are 2 common types: The first hangs from a stalk. Doctors will call this pedunculated. The second is flat and grows directly out of the tissue around it. You’ll hear it called sessile. Some polyps are benign and can’t turn into cancer. Others can. The odds depend on their location, cause, and how long they’ve been there.
Colon Polyps.

They’re more common than you might think -- almost half of us will get them. There are 2 main types:

Hyperplastic polyps are small, grow near the end of the colon, and don’t turn into cancer.
Adenomatous polyps affect more people. If they’re large, they’re more likely to become cancer, but it usually takes years. Most remain noncancerous.  
Colon Polyps: Diagnosis and Treatment.

During a colonoscopy, your doctor uses a tool to put a small camera into your anus so they can look at your colon. If they see polyps, they’ll remove them. They’ll also send a piece to a lab to look at with a microscope. This process, called a biopsy, is how they’ll know if it’s cancerous. You’re less likely to get cancer if your doctor finds and removes polyps early. They can help you decide when to do it, but most people should get a colonoscopy to look for polyps at 50.
Aural Polyps.

These grape-like clusters grow in your middle ear or ear canal. They’re often red and bleed easily when touched. They can sometimes be cancerous. It may be hard at first for your doctor to tell if they grew on their own or if were caused by an infection or some other condition. 
Aural Polyps: Diagnosis and Treatment.
If your doctor thinks the polyps result from an infection, they may prescribe antibiotics to get rid of them. If that doesn’t work, they might cut out a small piece to look at under a microscope to see if they’re cancerous. If they don’t go away, you’ll likely need surgery to get rid of them. 
Nasal Polyps.

Most are noncancerous. They pop up inside your nasal passages or sinuses when the lining is inflamed and swollen for a long time. They can weaken your sense of taste or smell, and cause a runny nose, headache, and snoring. Often they grow big enough to cause infections or make it hard to breathe.
Nasal Polyps: Diagnosis and Treatment.

Your doctor may suspect you have polyps because of your symptoms. They can look up your nose with a tool called a nasal endoscope to see for sure. Drugs that you swallow or spray into your nose may help get rid of them. Antibiotics may help if you have an infection. If they don’t work, your doctor can use an endoscope to remove the polyps. But if you have severe polyps, you might need more involved surgery.
Uterine Polyps.
Also known as endometrial polyps, these grow in the lining of your uterus. Some are attached with a thin stalk (they’re called pedunculated). Others grow from a broad base (they’re called sessile). They are roundish in shape and can be as small as a sesame seed or as large as a golf ball. They’re usually noncancerous, but they can change your monthly period or make it hard to get pregnant.
Uterine Polyps: Diagnosis and Treatment.

Along with an exam, monthly cycle details -- how long, how frequent, how much blood, spotting between periods -- can help your doctor decide if you have polyps. They may look at your uterus or remove a piece of it to test. You might not need treatment if you have no symptoms. But if polyps cause heavy bleeding, pregnancy problems, or come after menopause, they’ll want them gone. Drugs can ease symptoms, but only surgery can get rid of polyps.
Vocal Cord Polyp.

It’s a noncancerous growth or lesion on your vocal cord cover. It usually grows on just one side of the vocal cord. Your voice may be hoarse, lower than normal, or break in the middle of a sentence. It might take more effort or force to speak or sing.
Vocal Cord Polyp: 
Diagnosis and Treatment.
Your doctor will want to know the full history of your voice problems. They may put a tube through your mouth to look at your vocal cords. They’ll check for acid reflux, allergies, and hormone problems. They can all make your voice problems worse. Voice rest and special vocal exercises may be all you need to get better. This depends in part on how you use your voice. A professional singer may need surgery.
Stomach Polyps.

Also called gastric polyps, they form on the lining of your stomach. Most don't become cancerous, but some types mean you’re more likely to get the disease in the future. They often don't cause any symptoms. Your doctor usually finds them when they examine you for some other reason.
Stomach Polyps: Diagnosis and Treatment.
If your doctor suspects polyps, they’ll look into your stomach with a tool called an endoscope. If they see a type called adenoma, which can become cancer, they may remove it or take a piece to look at. They could test it for H. pylori bacteria, which are linked to stomach polyps, and prescribe antibiotics if you have them. For small polyps that aren’t adenomas, they might just watch them to see what happens. They’ll probably remove large polyps.
Guide to Kidney Cancer.
How Does It Happen?

These organs' main job is to filter waste from your blood and make pee. But they also help control your blood pressure and make sure you have enough red blood cells. Kidney cancer, also called renal cell carcinoma, happens when cells in one or both of them start to grow out of control and form a tumor that crowds out healthy cells. This kind of cancer is one of the 10 most common in both men and women.
Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC).
While there are many kinds of kidney cancer, 9 out of 10 people who have it have this type. It’s usually one tumor inside one kidney, but there can be more than one, and they can happen in both kidneys.
Who Gets It?

Most people diagnosed with kidney cancer are between 50 and 70 years old. Men are 2 to 3 times more likely to get it than women, and African-American people have a higher chance of getting it than other groups. High blood pressure, kidney disease, and certain problems with your genes, like von Hippel-Lindau disease, also can raise your chances. It can run in families, too.
Other Things That Raise Your Odds

You’re more likely to get it if:

You smoke: This doubles your risk. It’s believed to cause 30% of kidney cancers in men and 25% in women.
You have extra weight: People who are overweight or obese are nearly twice as likely to get RCC.
You have exposure to certain substances at the workplace such as cadmium or trichloroethylene. 
Symptoms.

If you have a small tumor, you might not notice any signs, but larger ones can cause these problems:

Blood in your pee
A lump on your side or lower back
Low back pain 
Feeling tired
Weight loss for no reason
Fever
Diagnosis: Urine and Blood Tests.

Your doctor will give you an exam. If they think you might have kidney cancer, they’ll probably start with urinalysis, which tests your pee for blood or cancer cells. They also might do a blood test to see how well your kidneys are working and a complete blood count to make sure you have a healthy number of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. People with kidney cancer often have anemia -- when you don’t have enough red blood cells.
Diagnosis: Imaging Tests.
Your doctor may do scans to get a closer look at your kidneys:

Ultrasound: Sound waves make black-and-white images on a computer screen.
Computerized tomography (CT) scan: X-rays from different angles are put together to make a more complete picture.
Magnetic imaging resonance (MRI) scan: Magnets and radio waves make detailed images.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan: Radiation makes 3-D color images.
Biopsy.

With kidney cancers, biopsies are rarely needed and are done only in very rare situations. If your doctor decides one is needed, they will recommend surgery to take a tiny sample from the tumor with a needle so it can be tested. In a case like that, the biopsy is used to tell for sure whether what you have is cancer. 
Grades.

If it turns out you do have cancer, your doctor will want to try to predict how fast it may grow. They’ll do this based on how much the cancer cells look like healthy ones. Kidney cancer can be grade 1, 2, 3, or 4 -- grade 4 cells look very different from normal ones and tend to grow fastest.
Staging.

Your doctor will also try to tell how far the cancer has spread -- it can be stage I, II, III, or IV. A stage I cancer is only in your kidney, while a stage IV has spread to other parts of your body.
Treatment Plan.

Your doctor will make recommendations based on the type of kidney cancer you have, the grade and stage of the cancer, your age, and any other health problems you might have.
Wait and See.

Your doctor may suggest this approach if your tumor is small. They’ll want to do tests often to see if it starts to grow quickly or gets bigger than an inch and a half. 
Surgery.

This is the most common treatment. Your doctor may take out only the part of the kidney where the tumor is and let the healthy part keep working. In other cases, it may need to be removed -- most people do fine with only one.
Tumor ‘Destroyers’.

If you’re not able to have surgery to take out the tumor, your doctor may try to destroy it instead. They might use radio waves to heat the tumor or cold gases to freeze it. These can kill cancer cells without hurting your kidney. If your cancer is causing a lot of bleeding, they might block the artery that brings blood to the kidney. But that kills not only the tumor, but your kidney, too.
Targeted Therapy.

Kidney tumors make their own network of blood vessels that let them grow. A new kind of drug targets these vessels but leaves normal ones alone. Without blood, the tumor stops growing or even shrinks. This therapy is used to treat more advanced renal cell cancer. Other targeted therapies block a protein called mTOR that helps cancer cells grow.
Immunotherapy.

The idea with this is to boost your immune system so it can fight or kill cancer cells. Your doctor may suggest it if targeted therapy doesn’t work for you, or they may recommend that the two be used together.
Chemotherapy.

This is a combination of powerful drugs that’s used to kill cells that are growing fast. It doesn’t seem to work well against kidney cancer, but your doctor may try it if other treatments haven’t worked.
Radiation.

This treatment uses high-energy rays to kill cancer cells or shrink tumors. But kidney cancer isn’t very sensitive to radiation, so it’s not done often. You may get it if you can’t have surgery or to help with symptoms like pain or bleeding. You also might have it if cancer has spread to other parts of your body, like your bones or brain.
Clinical Trials.
Researchers are working to find new treatments. If you volunteer to be part of a clinical trial, you may get cutting-edge treatment years before other people can. Talk to your doctor, or call the American Cancer Society’s clinical trial helpline at 800-303-5691 to find studies near you.
Guide to Liver Cancer.
How Does It Happen?
Your liver does a lot for you, like filter your blood and break down food. It’s one of your largest -- and most important -- organs. When you have liver cancer, some cells there grow out of control and form a tumor. That can affect how well your liver works.
Symptoms.

Most people don’t notice any signs of liver cancer early on. When they do show up, you may:

Feel full easily or not want to eat
Have a lump below your right rib cage
Feel pain on the upper right side of your belly or near your right shoulder
Have an upset stomach
Have swelling in your belly
Feel tired and weak
Lose weight
Have white, chalky poop and dark pee
Notice a yellowish color in your skin and the whites of your eyes.
If You Have Liver Disease

Certain diseases can make you more likely to get liver cancer, including:

Long-term hepatitis B or C -- viruses that attack and damage your liver
Cirrhosis -- liver damage that can make scar tissue replace healthy tissue
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease -- a buildup of fat in your liver
Liver diseases you’re born with, like hereditary hemochromatosis (when excess iron is stored in your liver and other organs).
Alcohol, Obesity, Diabetes Raise Your Odds.

One main cause of cirrhosis in the U.S. is drinking large amounts of alcohol over many years. Since cirrhosis can make you more likely to have liver cancer, that means drinking heavily can make you more likely to get it. And if you’re very overweight or have diabetes or a condition called metabolic syndrome, you’re at higher risk of getting nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, which can lead to liver cancer, too.
Toxins Raise Your Chances.

Some of these can cause liver cancer, including:

Aflatoxins: poisons made by molds that can grow on crops like corn and peanuts if they’re not stored the right way
Arsenic: a chemical that’s sometimes in well water
Thorium dioxide: a substance once used for some kinds of X-rays (it’s not used anymore)
Vinyl chloride: a chemical used to make some kinds of plastics.
Most Common Type.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) happens in the main cells of your liver, called hepatocytes. HCC usually causes one tumor that grows larger over time. But if you have both cirrhosis and HCC, you’re likely to have many small tumors spread throughout your liver.
Other Types.

Bile duct cancer happens in the tubes that carry bile -- a fluid that breaks down foods -- out of your liver. This is the second most common kind of liver cancer. Angiosarcoma and hemangiosarcoma are cancers found in your liver’s blood vessels. Both are rare and sometimes caused by toxins. Hepatoblastoma is a very rare cancer that happens mostly in children under age 4.
Tests.

If your doctor thinks you might have liver cancer, they may recommend:

Biopsy: They’ll take a small sample of your liver to test for cancer.
Blood tests: These check how well your liver’s working and look for things in your blood that may be signs of cancer, called tumor markers.
Imaging test: This might be an ultrasound, CT scan, MRI, or an angiogram, which is a kind of X-ray that looks at your blood vessels.
Stages.

These tell you how far your cancer has spread:

Stage I: One tumor that hasn’t spread anywhere else
Stage II: One tumor that’s spread into blood vessels, or more than one tumor, but all smaller than 2 inches
Stage III: One tumor that’s spread to major blood vessels or nearby organs, or more than one tumor and at least one of them is larger than 2 inches
Stage IV: The cancer has spread to other body parts.
Treatment: Surgery or Transplant.

Treatment for liver cancer depends on the stage as well as your age, overall health, and the health of your liver. If the cancer hasn’t spread and you don’t have other liver problems, you may have:

Surgery to remove the tumor
A liver transplant, where you get a new liver from a donor. This isn’t common.
Treatment: Ablation Therapy.

This tries to kill cancer cells in different ways:

Alcohol: Your doctor puts pure alcohol into the tumors to destroy them.
Freezing: Your doctor uses a thin, blunt instrument called a probe to freeze and kill tumor cells.
Heat: Microwaves can make enough heat to destroy tumors.
Electrical pulses: Bursts of electricity kill cancer cells (this is still being tested).
Treatment: Embolization Therapy.

Your liver gets blood from two main blood vessels. Tumors usually use just one: the hepatic artery. With embolization therapy, a thin tube goes into your thigh and to that artery. Your doctor puts a substance into the tube to block blood flow through there and starve the tumor of nutrients. (Your liver will still get blood through the other blood vessel.) Chemotherapy drugs or radiation beads also may be put in through the tube.
Treatment: Targeted Therapy.

Cancer cells work differently than normal cells. Targeted therapy uses drugs designed to attack cancer cells based on those differences. This may keep tumors from making blood vessels they need to survive, or it may stop tumor cells from dividing so they can’t grow.
Can You Prevent It?

No, but you can lower your chances of getting liver cancer:

Get the hepatitis B vaccine.
Stay a healthy weight through the food you eat and exercise.
Limit the amount of alcohol you drink: up to one a day for women, two for men.
Don’t use intravenous (IV) drugs -- if you do, use clean needles.
Get tattoos and piercings only at safe, clean shops.
Practice safe sex.
Guide to Uterine Cancer.
What Is It?

It’s a cancerous tumor in your uterus, the pear-shaped organ also known as your womb. Most cases happen in the lining of the uterus (endometrium), but you can get tumors in the muscles there, too. Over 60,000 women in the U.S. get this type of cancer each year. If you’re past menopause, your chances are higher.
Your Genes.
These can play a role in how likely you are to have uterine cancer. For example, Lynch syndrome is a genetic disorder that makes you more likely to get certain cancers. Women with it have much higher odds of getting uterine cancer. But having a problem gene doesn’t mean you’ll get it. It means you and your doctor should watch for signs so you can treat it early if you do. Most women who get uterine cancer don’t have a known genetic cause.
Early Signs.

If you haven’t been through menopause and you have bleeding or spotting -- a red, pink, or white discharge -- between periods, see your doctor. The same is true if you’ve had menopause and have these symptoms any time. Bleeding can be a sign of uterine cancer, but it’s also a symptom of other medical problems. Bleeding after menopause isn’t normal, so it definitely needs to be checked out. Your doctor can help you find out what’s going on.
Other Symptoms.

Let your doctor know if you have:

Pain in your pelvis (the area between your hips)
Lost weight without trying
Pain during sex
A hard time peeing or it hurts to pee
It’s best if you find uterine cancer before it grows or spreads, so don’t put off your checkups or ignore symptoms.
How It’s Diagnosed.

You may have an ultrasound so your doctor can see inside your uterus. Your doctor may send a thin, lighted tube in through your vagina to get a closer look. But a biopsy is the best way to know if it’s cancer. Your doctor will take a small amount of tissue from the endometrium and look for cancer cells under a microscope.
Has It Spread?

If you have uterine cancer, your doctor will start with one of the following to see if it has spread to nearby areas, like your cervix, or to your lymph nodes (tiny glands in your neck, armpits, groin, and other parts of your body):
Ultrasound
MRI scan, which uses magnets and radio waves to make detailed images of parts of your body
CT scan, which takes X-rays from different angles and puts them together to make a more complete picture
Surgery.

Your doctor probably will recommend that your uterus be taken out. They may surgically remove your uterus through your vagina or abdomen. The procedure is called a hysterectomy. Your ovaries and fallopian tubes will probably be removed, too. If your cancer has spread, your doctor also may take out nearby lymph nodes. 
Radiation.
Your doctor may recommend this after surgery to kill any cancer cells that may still be there. It may also be an option if surgery isn’t a good idea for you. Your doctor may insert a cylinder containing radioactive material into your vagina, or use a machine to aim high-energy rays at the harmful cells. New types of radiation treatment make a 3-dimensional beam that’s the exact shape of the tumor.
Hormone Therapy.
Estrogen and other hormones in your body can make uterine cancer grow or spread faster. Drugs like progestins, tamoxifen, LHRH agonists, and aromatase inhibitors are used to block these hormones to slow the tumor’s growth. This can cause side effects that feel like menopause, including hot flashes, weight gain, or dryness in your vagina.
Immunotherapy.

These drugs help your own immune system find and attack cancer cells. To keep itself from fighting the body's normal cells, your immune system uses "checkpoints." These are parts of cells that need to be turned on or off to start the disease-fighting process. Drugs that target these checkpoints, called immune checkpoint inhibitors, may help treat some more serious types of endometrial cancer.
Targeted Therapy.

Some newer drugs target changes that are seen in cancer cells. Several of them work by stopping new blood vessels from forming in tumors. This helps slow the spread of cancer.
Clinical Trials.
You may be able to be part of a test for new and better drugs to treat uterine cancer. Ask your doctor if there are trials in your area and if one might be right for you.
Your Sex Life.

Side effects of uterine cancer treatment can change your sex life. Vaginal dryness or mood changes from hormone therapy may make sex painful or reduce your desire. If you’ve had surgery to remove both your ovaries and uterus, you may have the same issues. But lubricants can help with dryness, and some women say their sex lives actually get better after surgery because they have less pain and other symptoms.
Pregnancy.
While most women who get uterine cancer are past menopause, younger women can get it, too. If you hope to have children, talk to your doctor about your options, such as storing eggs, before you begin treatment -- surgery, radiation, and hormones can affect your fertility. 
Can You Prevent It?

Get regular women’s health checkups so your doctor can spot any signs of cancer early. Your age, genes, and family history may raise your risk of uterine cancer. So can obesity. You can do some things to help prevent it, though, like staying at a healthy weight and getting plenty of exercise. Work closely with your doctor, who can help you control the risk factors that can be controlled. 
Guide to Testicular Cancer.
What Is It?

Testicles -- the male sex organs that hang in the scrotum, just below the penis -- make sperm and the hormone testosterone. Like most other parts of your body, they can get cancer. It’s rare compared with other cancers, but it’s one of the most common in men ages 15 to 35. Even if it spreads outside the testicle, it’s very treatable.
Types of Testicular Cancer.

Most testicular cancer starts in germ cells, which make sperm. There are two main types of germ cell testicular cancer:

Non-seminomas tend to happen in younger men and spread quickly.
Older men are more likely to have seminomas -- these typically don’t spread as fast as non-seminomas.
Symptoms.

The most common sign is swelling or a lump in a testicle that doesn’t cause pain. It may be pea-sized or larger. Other symptoms include:

Changes in how a testicle feels -- it may feel firmer or have a different texture
A feeling of heaviness or weight in the scrotum
Pain, discomfort, or a dull ache in the testicles, scrotum, lower belly, or groin
Sudden buildup of fluid in the scrotum.
When to See Your Doctor.

If you have pain, swelling, or a lump in one of your testicles, go see your doctor. Don’t put it off more than 2 weeks. If it is cancer, early treatment can make you more likely to be cured. If you wait to go to your doctor, that gives the cancer time to spread to other parts of your body.
What Causes It?

Doctors don’t know what causes testicular cancer. They know it starts like other types, when certain cells begin to grow out of control and form a tumor. But researchers are trying to figure out what triggers that. Still, some things are known to boost your odds of having it.
What Causes It?

Doctors don’t know what causes testicular cancer. They know it starts like other types, when certain cells begin to grow out of control and form a tumor. But researchers are trying to figure out what triggers that. Still, some things are known to boost your odds of having it.
An Undescended Testicle.

Before birth, the testicles develop in a baby’s belly. They usually drop into the scrotum by the time they're born or at least by age 1. But sometimes, one (or both) don’t drop -- this is an undescended testicle. Men who had this problem are more likely to get testicular cancer, even if they had surgery to correct it. Surgery still helps, though -- testicles are easier to check when they’re in the scrotum.
Personal or Family History.
You’re more likely to get it if a close relative, like your father or brother, has it. If that’s the case, do self-exams to check for lumps about once a month. And if you had cancer in one testicle, you have higher odds of getting it in the other one. Make sure to go to all your scheduled follow-ups.
How It’s Diagnosed: Blood Tests?

In many cases, men find a lump on their own or their doctor finds one during a routine exam. If your doctor thinks it might be cancer, they may ask for an ultrasound to see if a mass is visible. They also may recommend a blood test to look for markers -- things in your blood, like proteins or hormones, that can be higher if you have a tumor. 
How It’s Diagnosed: Ultrasound and Surgery.

With other types of cancer, doctors often test a tumor sample for cancer. But they don’t do that for testicular cancer, because that can damage a testicle and cause the cancer to spread. Instead, your doctor probably will do an ultrasound, which makes images of your scrotum and testicles. If it looks like you have cancer, you may have surgery to remove the testicle and have it tested. This will tell if it’s cancer and what kind it is.
Staging Tests.

If you’re diagnosed with testicular cancer,  you’ll need more  tests to see where it might have spread. It helps your doctor decide the kind of treatment you’ll need. You’ll typically have:

A computerized tomography (CT) scan, which takes X-rays from several angles and puts them together to make detailed images of your belly, chest, and pelvis
Blood tests to see if markers are still in your blood after your testicle has been removed.
Stages.

The stage of your cancer will be based on the size of the tumor and how far it’s spread: 

Stage 0: The cancer is only found in the small tubes called seminiferous tubules located inside the testicle.
Stage I: The tumor may have grown outside of the testicle into structures nearby.  It has not spread to lymph nodes or to distant sites in the body.
Stage II: The cancer has spread to lymph nodes in your belly.
Stage III: The cancer has spread to other parts of your body, like your lungs, liver, bones, or brain.
Treatment: Surgery.

Typically, you’ll have surgery to remove the testicle no matter what stage or type you have. For stages II and III, your doctor may also take out some lymph nodes to test for cancer. For early stages, surgery may be the only treatment you need. Then you’ll have follow-up exams every few months for the first few years. During those visits, you may get chest X-rays, CT scans, and blood tests.
Treatment: Chemotherapy and Radiation.

After surgery, your doctor may suggest:

Radiation: high-energy beams that kill cancer cells
Chemotherapy: strong drugs that kill cancer cells
For seminomas, doctors may use radiation or chemotherapy. For non-seminomas, they tend to use chemotherapy. Both may cause infertility -- you might not be able to father a child after these treatments. If you want children someday, talk to your doctor about sperm banking before your treatment.
Self-Exams.

Your doctor may recommend that you check for lumps each month, especially if you’re more likely to get testicular cancer. To do these exams:

Shower or bathe first so the scrotum is loose. 
Stand in front of a mirror to look for swelling in the scrotum.
Hold your testicle between your thumbs and fingers and roll it gently.
Feel for lumps, swelling, or changes in texture.
Guide to Head and Neck Cancers.
Where Do They Start?

The moist surfaces inside your mouth, nose, and throat are the most common places for head and neck cancers to grow. Your salivary glands also have cells that can become cancerous, but that’s more rare. Doctors further classify these tumors by their specific location in your body.
What Are the Symptoms?

A lump in your neck or a sore in your mouth that doesn’t heal is cause for concern. Other warning signs include hoarseness or a scratchy throat that doesn’t get better and pain in your neck, jaw, or ears. You also might have nosebleeds often or be congested. Many of these issues can be caused by other conditions, too.
What Raises Your Chances?

If you regularly drink alcohol and use tobacco -- smoke or smokeless -- you’re more likely to get a head or neck cancer than someone who doesn’t. People with the human papillomavirus (HPV) have higher odds, too, and poor dental health also can boost your chances.
Type: Oral Cancer

These cancers affect your lips and gums, the front two-thirds of your tongue, your cheek and lip linings, under your tongue, and the roof of your mouth. Because of this, your dentist might be the first to spot a problem. Early signs include a lump or sore that doesn’t heal, and you might see a red or white patch on your gums or inside your cheek. If your dentures start to fit poorly, that’s another symptom.
How Is Oral Cancer Diagnosed?

If your doctor thinks you might have a problem, the next step probably will be an endoscopy -- your doctor uses a long, thin tube with a light and lens on it to get a better look at your mouth. They also will probably want to check a sample of cells under a microscope. They might take a small sample of tissue (called a biopsy), or you might have an exfoliative cytology, which uses a tool to scrape off a few cells.
Treatment for Oral Cancer.

Standard treatment involves surgery to take out the cancer and any abnormal tissue that may have spread to other areas, including lymph nodes in your neck or nearby bone. That’s usually followed by radiation therapy, which kills any remaining cancer cells or stops their growth. Your medical team might include an ENT (ear, nose, and throat) doctor, cancer specialists, dentist, plastic surgeon, and speech therapist.
Type: Laryngeal Cancer.

Your larynx, also called your voice box, is at the top of your trachea, or windpipe. Hoarseness, trouble swallowing, and a visible lump in your neck are among the symptoms of this type of cancer. Your chances of getting it are higher if you use tobacco or drink alcohol regularly, but breathing in asbestos, wood or metal dust, or paint fumes at work can play a role, too. This condition is more common in men than in women.
Type: Laryngeal Cancer.
Your larynx, also called your voice box, is at the top of your trachea, or windpipe. Hoarseness, trouble swallowing, and a visible lump in your neck are among the symptoms of this type of cancer. Your chances of getting it are higher if you use tobacco or drink alcohol regularly, but breathing in asbestos, wood or metal dust, or paint fumes at work can play a role, too. This condition is more common in men than in women.
How Is Laryngeal Cancer Diagnosed?
A laryngoscopy gives your doctor a close-up look at your larynx. A thin tube with a light and lens goes through your mouth. It can also have a special tool on it to take out a few cells, which your doctor will check under a microscope. You also might have a barium swallow, when you drink a chalky liquid that helps abnormal areas show up on X-rays. The swallow can help evaluate whether there is any other coexisting cancer.
Treatment for Laryngeal Cancer
The type of surgery you’ll need depends on your specific case, but it can be possible to save your voice. Radiation and chemotherapy -- strong medicine that kills cancer cells -- are also part of the standard treatment. New treatments being tested include drugs to lower the chances cancer will come back (chemoprevention) and medicines that help the radiation work better (radiosensitizers).
Type: Pharyngaeal Cancer
Your pharynx, or throat, stretches from behind your nose to the top of your esophagus (the tube that carries food to your stomach). It’s divided into three parts: nasopharynx (behind your nose), oropharynx (back of your mouth, base of your tongue, and tonsils), and hypopharanx (the bottom part). Nasopharyngeal cancer is more common in Asia, Africa, and the Mediterranean than in the U.S.
How Is Pharyngeal Cancer Diagnosed?
If your doctor thinks you have a problem with your nasopharynx, they’ll do a detailed exam of your head and neck. You may also have a blood test for a virus that’s linked to an illness called Epstein-Barr. For oropharyngeal issues, they may check for HPV. Other tests might include an endoscopy, laryngoscopy, or nasoscopy, when a tube is put through your nose to get a closer look.
Treatment for Pharyngeal Cancer.

Surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy are the standard treatments, no matter which part of your pharynx is affected. For oropharyngeal cases, you might get targeted therapy that uses something called monoclonal antibodies. These are made in the lab from immune system cells and put into your body to attack cancer cells.
Type: Nasal Cavity Cancer.

Cancer cells can grow in the tissue behind your nose (the nasal cavity) and the hollow areas in the bones near it, called the paranasal sinuses. Symptoms include constant congestion, sinus infections that don’t get better with treatment, headaches, swollen eyes, and problems with your sense of smell.
Diagnosing, Treating Nasal Cavity Cancer.

You may have a nasoscopy to look for abnormal areas. Your doctor may also do what’s called a fine-needle aspiration (or FNA) biopsy to take some fluid or tissue to check under a microscope. X-rays and an MRI to get a closer look at the area might also help diagnose your condition. As with other types of head and neck cancers, surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy are standard treatments.
Type: Salivary Gland Cancer.
Found in the floor of your mouth and near your jawbone, these make saliva. Symptoms of this type of cancer include pain, numbness, or weakness in your face. You also may have trouble swallowing or opening your mouth wide. Fluid that drains from your ear is another sign. This condition is linked to exposure to radiation -- as a treatment for an earlier cancer, for example.
Salivary Gland Cancer Diagnosis.

Your doctor will use a needle or tiny cut to take out a small part of the problem area and look at it under a microscope to make sure it’s cancer. If possible, they might take out the entire tumor.
Treatment for Salivary Gland Cancer.
Surgery and chemotherapy are the standard treatments, but the kind of radiation your doctor uses may depend on where the cancer is and how far it’s progressed. Fast neutron therapy uses high-energy radiation. This lets you have fewer appointments. Photon beam radiation, used on deep tumors, involves X-rays. And internal radiation therapy puts radioactive seeds or wires inside you near the cancer to kill the harmful cells.
Cancer Treatment Types.
Chemotherapy (Chemo).
This strong medication keeps cancer from spreading, makes it grow slower, or even kills cancer cells. It can cause side effects because it kills cells in your body that grow quickly, including those in your blood, mouth, digestive system, and hair follicles. There are over 100 types of chemo drugs. Your doctor will choose the one that’s best for your type of cancer. You may take it as a pill or capsule, rub it into your skin as a cream, or get it as an injection or IV at home or in the hospital.
External Beam Radiation.
This treatment attacks cancer cells with high-energy particles (proton or particle therapy) or waves (X-rays). It kills or damages cells in one specific area instead of throughout your whole body. The most common type comes from a machine outside your body. It’s called external-beam radiation.
Internal Radiation.
You’ll probably hear your doctor call it brachytherapy. They’ll put radioactive implants about the size of a grain of rice inside your body where the tumor is. The radiation kills the cancer cells. This treatment makes you radioactive for a while, so you may have to avoid other people until it’s finished.
Open Surgery.
Treating cancer with surgery works best if you have a solid tumor in one area. It often can’t treat cancer that has spread or cancer that’s in your blood, like leukemia. The surgeon makes a cut in your skin with a scalpel or other sharp tool and removes as much of the tumor as possible. They may also take out lymph nodes and other tissues for testing. This is called open surgery.
Minimally Invasive Surgery.
The goal for this procedure is the same as open surgery: to remove tumors, and also tissues and lymph nodes if needed. Instead of one large cut, the surgeon makes several small ones. They put a tube with a tiny camera into one cut to see inside your body, and tools into the others. This is called laparoscopic surgery. It usually has a shorter recovery time than open surgery.
Other Surgeries.
Cryosurgery uses very cold nitrogen or argon gas to freeze off abnormal tissue. It can treat some early skin cancers, retinoblastoma, and precancerous spots on your skin or cervix.

Photodynamic therapy is a laparoscopic surgery that puts drugs near tumors. Light activates the medicine, and it kills cancer cells.

Laser surgery uses strong beams of light to cut into your skin. It’s good for very tiny areas. Lasers can also sometimes shrink tumors.
Stem Cell Transplant.
These are cells in your blood and bone marrow that haven’t matured into their final form. The doctor uses them to replace cells in your bone marrow that other treatments kill. That means you can get higher doses of those therapies. Sometimes, stem cells can find and kill cancer cells. You get stem cell transplants through a catheter, much like a blood transfusion.
Precision Medicine.
This new field, also called personalized medicine, uses your genetic makeup and other things to find out the best treatment for your cancer. In the “one-size-fits-all” model, your doctor chooses the option that works best on most cancers like yours. Precision medicine helps take some of the guesswork out of the selection process. It isn’t used widely for all forms of the disease. Many people who get it are part of clinical trials.
Targeted Therapies.
These are usually paired with other treatments. They’re strong medicine, like chemotherapy, but instead of killing all fast-growing cells, they home in on the parts of cancer cells that make them different from other cells. Targeted drugs do things like stop blood vessels from growing around cancer cells or turn off signals that tell cancer cells to grow. They can also tell your immune system to destroy them or change their proteins so they die.
Hormone Therapy.
Also called endocrine therapy, it targets cancers that use hormones to grow. There are two kinds of this therapy: one that stops you from making hormones, and one that keep hormones from working the way they should. You can either take them as pills or get them through a shot. Sometimes you may get surgery to remove an organ that makes hormones, like ovaries or testicles. Doctors use hormone therapy with other methods to shrink tumors before surgery or treatment, or to kill cancer cells that have spread to other parts of your body. It can also lower the chances that your cancer will return.
Gene Therapy.
This treatment uses a special carrier, usually a virus, to put RNA or DNA into your living cells. Your doctor will either remove some of your cells and put the genetic materials into them in a lab or give you the carrier directly. The changed cells then either kill cancer cells, slow their growth, or help healthy cells fight cancer better. Doctors don’t use this method widely yet, but several types of gene therapies are available for certain diseases.
Immunotherapy.
This type of biological therapy, or biotherapy, uses your immune system to fight the cancer. It either boosts your immune system or marks cancer cells so your immune system can find and destroy them more easily. You get it by mouth as a pill, into a vein as an IV, by rubbing a cream into your skin, or through a catheter directly into your bladder.
Types of Immunotherapy
Immune checkpoint inhibitors are drugs that take the brakes off your immune system to help it find and attack cancer cells.

Cancer vaccines start an immune response against cancer cells so your body can better attack them. They can also prevent certain cancers.

Monoclonal antibodies are drugs made in a lab to work like your natural antibodies. They mark cancer cells as the ones your immune system should attack. They can also help chemotherapy and radiation go directly to cancer cells.
Adoptive Cell Transfer (ACT).
This is another type of immunotherapy, but it also involves gene therapy. Doctors take immune cells from your blood and add genes to change them so they can better spot and kill cancer cells. Then they grow lots of these cells in a lab and put them back into your body. So far, the only kind of ACT approved by the FDA is called CAR T-cell therapy.
Does This Cause Cancer?
Artificial Sweeteners.

Despite all the talk -- and chain emails -- there’s no proof that these sugar stand-ins raise your risk of cancer. Saccharine did cause cancer in rats, but their bodies react to it differently than ours, researchers say. There hasn’t been a cancer warning label on it since 2000. A study of aspartame in people found no link either.
X-rays

Your dentist covers you in a lead blanket for a reason. Even low doses of X-rays raise your chances of getting cancer, but only by a small amount. In general, the higher the dose of radiation, the more the risk. But there’s no amount of this kind of radiation that’s totally safe. That’s why the EPA limits how much you can get.
Cell Phones

This gadget, which you keep near all the time, gives off the same type of energy as microwave ovens. So far, it hasn’t been linked to cancer, but more research is needed. Just to be safe:

Save it for short chats or when there’s no landline.
Use a hands-free device.
Meat.
Whether it’s processed or red, you need less of it in your life. Just one hot dog a day could boost your chances of getting colon cancer.  Luncheon meats, cold cuts, and hot dogs all have preservatives called nitrites, which cause cancer. Smoking meats or cooking them at a high temperature creates compounds called PAHs. Studies are under way to see how they affect people.
Bottled Water.

If your bottle is clear plastic, it may contain bisphenol A (BPA). This chemical is used in food and drink containers (except for baby bottles), dental sealants, and other products. Does it cause cancer? The FDA says no, BPA is safe at current levels found in foods. If you’re concerned, avoid canned foods and store chow and drinks in clear plastic. For hot food, use glass or steel instead. 
Sex.

It’s true. Human papillomavirus (HPV), the most common sexually transmitted infection, can cause cervical and other cancers. Most adults who have sex will get this virus at some point. But they won’t all get cancer. Most of the time, HPV goes away by itself. To lower your risk:

Get vaccinated if you’re ages 9 to 26. The vaccine can also can be given to adults ages 27 to 45. Talk to your doctor. 
Use condoms during sex.
Have sex with only one partner.
Dental Fillings.

Don’t call the dentist to have your metal filings removed and replaced. Experts say your current ones are safe. Studies have found no link between fillings with mercury and cancer -- or any other disease.

Coffee.

If you feel your day doesn’t really start until you’ve had a shot of caffeine, you’ll love this. New research shows that drinking moderate amounts of coffee (around four cups daily) lessens the risk of some types of cancer, among them liver, prostate, uterus, and some mouth and throat cancers.
Deodorant and Antiperspirant.

There are no large studies that support the claims that deodorants or antiperspirants can cause breast cancer. They have different jobs -- deodorant blocks the smell and antiperspirant stops sweat. Many use chemicals that act like the hormone estrogen, which causes cancer cells to grow. These include benzylparaben, butylparaben, methylparaben, and propylparaben. The effects of these parabens on human cancer risk are unknown.
Fluoride.

This compound is found in water and other drinks and in food, toothpastes, and mouth rinses. Though many studies have looked for links between it and cancer, most researchers says there’s no strong tie. If you’re worried about it, you can ask the Environmental Protection Agency how much is in your drinking water. If it’s high, switch to bottled spring water, which usually has the least.
Household Products

Many pesticides, paints, varnishes, and waxes give off gases known as volatile organic compounds  (VOCs). So do some cleaning, cosmetic, automotive, and hobby products. These gases have been linked to cancer in humans and animals. To cut your risk choose products labeled low-VOC and biodegradable when possible. Avoid items labeled as: 

Danger/Poison
Corrosive
Severely Irritating
Highly Flammable
Highly Combustible
Strong Sensitizer
Power Lines.

Anything that makes, sends, or uses electricity gives off extremely low frequency (ELF) radiation. There’s no proof that it causes cancer. Still, the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences says there’s cause for “limited concern.” To be safe, stay at least an arm’s length away from electrical devices. If you live close to a power line and you're worried, get a gizmo called a gaussmeter. You can use it to measure the ELF fields near you. 
Pollution.
Air pollution causes over 220,000 lung cancer deaths worldwide a year (most of them in Asia). There’s also a link between dirty air and a higher risk of bladder cancer. But the odds for any one person are low. To cut your chances, listen to local smog alerts. Try to stay inside on days when the air quality is poor.
What Are the Treatment Options for GIS.T?
Treating Gastrointestinal Tumors.

GISTs are different from more common types of GI tumors because of the type of tissue in which they start. GISTs belong to a group of cancers called soft-tissue sarcomas. Soft-tissue sarcomas develop in the tissues that support and connect the body.
How Doctors Treat GIST.

Surgery usually comes first. Afterward, you may take drugs that target the proteins that cause GIST. Those proteins are in cells that help move food through the digestive system. You usually don’t need chemotherapy and radiation.
Finding the Tumors.

Doctors can use tests like CT and MRI scans to check for suspicious areas. You may drink a barium drink or take a barium enema to enhance X-ray images. Your doctor may insert an endoscope, a tiny flexible tube with a video camera, into the GI tract for a closer look.
Is the Tumor Cancer?

When doctors find a tumor, they may remove a few cells from it to test for cancer. It’s hard to do that with GISTs, because they grow beneath the lining of the stomach or intestines. Surgeons may try to take a tiny sample with an endoscope. Or they may insert a long needle through the skin to get a sample. Often it’s best to remove the tumor and test it.
Tumor Tests.

Doctors use tests that change color if a tumor has too much of a protein called “cKIT” (tyrosine-protein kinase KIT) or a mutation of the protein called platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA). They also look for changes in the genes. And they check how fast cells in the GIST multiply, which helps them know how aggressive it is.
What Stage Is the Cancer?

Doctors assign a stage -- ranging from I to IV -- to GIST based on:

Size of the main tumor
Whether nearby lymph nodes have signs of cancer
If it spread, or metastasized, to other organs
How fast cells are multiplying
The higher the stage, the more serious the disease. Treatment depends on the stage of the cancer.
Will You Need an Operation?

Surgery is the main way to treat GIST. It’s generally the first choice, even if doctors need to remove parts of surrounding tissue or organs. Some tumors are impossible to cut out because they have spread into vital tissue or into other parts of the body. In those cases, doctors may prescribe medication to shrink tumors so they're small enough for surgery.
GIST Surgery.

Surgeons can remove small tumors using a laparoscope, a fiber-optic instrument that they insert through a small cut. For larger tumors, they may need to remove parts of affected organs, like the intestine or liver. GIST rarely spreads into nearby lymph nodes, so doctors usually don’t have to remove those.
Problems Before and After Surgery.

Before surgery, large tumors may block, tangle, or tear intestines. They may also cause internal bleeding, which can need urgent treatment and blood transfusions. After surgery, there can be infections, bowel obstruction, and heart and lung problems. Keep up with your doctor appointments to make sure you’re OK. If the surgeon removes part of your stomach, you may need to make some diet changes. Ask your doctor about that.Drugs That Help Treat GIST.

The chances of GIST coming back depend on the size of the tumor and how fast it was growing. Medication is important for people at risk for the tumor coming back. A recent study showed that 3 years of medicine improves your chance of living longer. Even when you can’t get surgery, certain drugs may improve your chance or curb problems caused by large tumors.
Medicine for GIST.

Options for treating GIST include, are imatinib (Gleevec), sunitinib (Sutent), and regorafenib (Stivarga), which It blocks the proteins that make the tumors grow. They can be taken before surgery to shrink tumors, after surgery to make it less likely that the cancer will come back, and for tumors that surgeons can’t operate on. If none of these prove successful, your doctor may prescribe ripretirib (Qinlock).”
Other Medications.

When imatinib doesn't work, sunitinib (Sutent) It can also slow down the disease and shrink tumors. Sunitinib is also a possibility if you have side effects from imatinib and your doctor wants to try another drug. Regorafenib (Stivarga) is an option if the other two don’t work or you can't take them. If the tumor has metastasized, your doctor may prescribe the kinase inhibitor avapritinib (Ayvakit).
Experimental Treatments.

Researchers are developing new drugs for GIST. Some of them work the same way as imatinib and sunitinib. Others work in different ways. You may want to ask your doctor about clinical trials that you could join, what they involve, and what you can expect if you sign up.
Top Cancer-Fighting Foods
Fighting Cancer by the Plateful.

No single food can prevent cancer, but the right combination of foods may help make a difference. At mealtimes, strike a balance of at least two-thirds plant-based foods and no more than one-third animal protein. This "New American Plate" is an important cancer fighting tool, according to the American Institute for Cancer Research. Check out better and worse choices for your plate.
Fighting Cancer With Colo.

Fruits and vegetables are rich in cancer-fighting nutrients -- and the more color, the more nutrients they contain. These foods can help lower your risk in a second way, too, when they help you reach and maintain a healthy body weight. Carrying extra pounds increases the risk for multiple cancers, including colon, esophagus, and kidney cancers. Eat a variety of vegetables, especially dark green, red, and orange vegetables.
The Cancer-Fighting Breakfast.

Naturally occurring folate is an important B vitamin that may help protect against cancers of the colon, rectum, and breast.  You can find it in abundance on the breakfast table. Fortified breakfast cereals and whole wheat products are good sources of folate. So are orange juice, melons, and strawberries.
More Folate-Rich Foods.

Other good sources of folate are asparagus and eggs. You can also find it in beans, sunflower seeds, and leafy green vegetables like spinach or romaine lettuce. The best way to get folate is not from a pill, but by eating enough fruits, vegetables, and enriched grain products. Women who are pregnant or may become pregnant should take a supplement to make sure they get enough folic acid to help prevent certain birth defects.
Pass Up the Deli Counter.
An occasional Reuben sandwich or hot dog at the ballpark isn't going to hurt you. But cutting back on processed meats like bologna, ham, and hot dogs will help lower your risk of colorectal and stomach cancers. Also, eating meats that have been preserved by smoking or with salt raises your exposure to chemicals that can potentially cause cancer.
Cancer-Fighting Tomatoes.

Whether it's the lycopene -- the pigment that gives tomatoes their red color -- or something else isn't clear. But some studies have linked eating tomatoes to reduced risk of several types of cancer, including prostate cancer. Studies also suggest that processed tomato products such as juice, sauce, or paste increase the cancer-fighting potential.
Tea's Anticancer Potential.

Even though the evidence is still spotty, tea, especially green tea, may be a strong cancer fighter. In laboratory studies, green tea has slowed or prevented the development of cancer in colon, liver, breast, and prostate cells. It also had a similar effect in lung tissue and skin. And in some longer term studies, tea was associated with lower risks for bladder, stomach, and pancreatic cancers. But more research in humans is needed before tea can be recommended as a cancer fighter.
Grapes and Cancer.

Grapes and grape juice, especially purple and red grapes, contain resveratrol. Resveratrol has strong antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. In laboratory studies, it has prevented the kind of damage that can trigger the cancer process in cells. There is not enough evidence to say that eating grapes or drinking grape juice or wine (or taking supplements) can prevent or treat cancer.
Limit Alcohol to Lower Cancer Risk.

Cancers of the mouth, throat, larynx, esophagus, liver, and breast are all linked with drinking alcohol. Alcohol may also raise the risk for cancer of the colon and rectum. The American Cancer Society recommends against drinking alcohol, but if you do, limit alcohol to no more than two drinks per day if you are a man and one drink a day if you are a woman. Women at higher risk for breast cancer may want to talk with a doctor about what amount of alcohol, if any, is safe based on their personal risk factors.
Water and Other Fluids Can Protect.

Water not only quenches your thirst, but it may protect you against bladder cancer. The lower risk comes from water diluting concentrations of potential cancer-causing agents in the bladder. Also, drinking more fluids causes you to urinate more frequently. That lessens the amount of time those agents stay in contact with the bladder lining.
The Mighty Bean.

Beans are so good for you, it's no surprise they may help fight cancer, too. They contain several potent phytochemicals that may protect the body's cells against damage that can lead to cancer. In the lab these substances slowed tumor growth and prevented tumors from releasing substances that damage nearby cells.
The Cabbage Family vs. Cancer.

Cruciferous vegetables include broccoli, cauliflower, cabbage, Brussels sprouts, bok choy, and kale. These members of the cabbage family make an excellent stir fry and can really liven up a salad. But most importantly, components in these vegetables may help your body defend against cancers such as colon, breast, lung, and cervix. Lab research has been promising, but human studies have had mixed results.
Dark Green Leafy Vegetables.

Dark green leafy vegetables such as mustard greens, lettuce, kale, chicory, spinach, and chard have an abundance of fiber, folate, and carotenoids. These nutrients may help protect against cancer of the mouth, larynx, pancreas, lung, skin, and stomach.
Protection From an Exotic Spice.

Curcumin is the main ingredient in the Indian spice turmeric and a potential cancer fighter. Lab studies show it can suppress the transformation, proliferation, and invasion of cancerous cells for a wide array of cancers. Research in humans is ongoing.
Cooking Methods Matter.

How you cook meat can make a difference in how big a cancer risk it poses. Frying, grilling, and broiling meats at very high temperatures causes chemicals to form that may increase cancer risk. Other cooking methods such as stewing, braising, or steaming appear to produce fewer of those chemicals. And when you do stew the meat, remember to add plenty of healthy vegetables.
A Berry Medley With a Punch.

Strawberries and raspberries have a phytochemical called ellagic acid. This powerful antioxidant may actually fight cancer in several ways at once, including deactivating certain cancer causing substances and slowing the growth of cancer cells. There is not, though, enough proof yet to say it can fight cancer in humans.
Blueberries for Health.

The potent antioxidants in blueberries may have wide value in supporting our health, starting with cancer. Antioxidants may help fight cancer by ridding the body of free radicals before they can do their damage to cells. But more research is needed. Try topping oatmeal, cold cereal, yogurt, even salad with blueberries to boost your intake of these healthful berries.
Pass on the Sugar.

Sugar may not cause cancer directly. But it may displace other nutrient-rich foods that help protect against cancer. And it increases calorie counts, which contributes to overweight and obesity. Excess weight is also a cancer risk. Fruit offers a sweet alternative in a vitamin-rich package.
Don't Rely on Supplements.

Vitamins may help protect against cancer. But that's when you get them naturally from food. Both the American Cancer Society and the American Institute for Cancer Research emphasize that getting cancer-fighting nutrients from foods like nuts, fruits, and green leafy vegetables is vastly superior to getting them from supplements. Eating a healthy diet is best.
Lower Your Risk of Cancer.
It’s the world’s leading cause of death, but about 1 in 3 cases can be prevented, according to the World Health Organization. There’s no magic pill to keep you from getting cancer, but you can do some things to improve your odds
Drop the Weight.

Nearly 70% of Americans are overweight or obese -- and those extra pounds drive up your chances of several types of cancer, including in your esophagus, pancreas, colon, kidneys, and thyroid gland. With fewer people smoking, obesity may pass tobacco as the top preventable cause of cancer. If every adult in the U.S. cut their body mass index (a measure of your body fat) by 1%, it might cut the number of new cases by as many as 100,000..
Eat Less Red Meat.

Along with cured meats like bacon, hot dogs, and lunchmeat, this has been linked to a higher risk of colon and stomach cancers. The American Institute for Cancer Research recommends no more than 18 ounces of these a week, or a little over a pound.   
Wear Sunscreen.
Harmful rays from the sun can give you more than a sunburn. Ultraviolet radiation can cause skin cancer, the most common kind of cancer in the U.S. And people who spend a lot of time in the sun have a higher risk. Most cases are curable if they’re found and treated early, but they can be life-threatening if they spread to other parts of your body. Sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of 30 or higher can help protect you.
Eat More Vegetables.

Vegetables and fruits can help stave off a range of cancers in your mouth, throat, windpipe, and esophagus. These foods have things that help your cells prevent damage that may lead to cancer later. You should get at least 2 1/2 cups of fruits and vegetables a day.
Don’t Count on Supplements.

A diet rich in vegetables, fruits, and whole grains is a better bet than nutritional supplements to lower your risk of cancer. Supplements don’t give you the same benefits as whole foods, and they can throw off the balance of other nutrients in your body. Supplements may help with certain conditions, but don’t bet on them to prevent cancer.

Cut Down on Sugar.
Foods or drinks with a lot of sugar tend to have more calories per ounce. If you have them often, you’re more likely to take in more calories than you burn in a day. That can make you gain weight -- and possibly increase your risk of cancer. You don’t have to skip the sugar entirely, but keep an eye out for things with added sweeteners.
Get Vaccinated for HPV.

Human papilloma virus (HPV) is often passed from person to person through sex. It can live in your body for years and you might not even notice. It’s the cause of nearly all cervical cancers in women and also can cause cancer of the vagina, penis, anus, mouth, and throat. Girls can get the vaccine between the ages of 9 and 26, and boys from 9 to 21. Using condoms can also lower your chances of getting HPV.
Get off the Couch.

People who exercise are less likely to get cancer of the colon, breast, or uterus. When you’re up and moving around, your body uses more energy, digests food faster, and prevents a buildup of some hormones that are linked to cancer. Being active also can help head off other health problems like heart disease or diabetes. 
Stub Out That Butt.

Do you smoke? It causes various kinds of cancer, as well as heart and lung disease. Though the share of Americans who light up regularly has dropped from more than 40% in the 1960s to about 15%, tobacco is still the No. 1 cause of preventable death in the U.S.
Ease off the Sauce.

You know which one we mean. Drinking too much alcohol can raise your risk of cancers of the digestive system -- your stomach, liver, and colon, among others -- as well as breast and throat cancer. It can hurt tissues in your body, damage your liver, and mix with other chemicals to harm your cells. Men shouldn’t have more than two drinks a day, and women should limit it to one. 
Get a Hepatitis B Shot.

People who have the hepatitis B virus are 100 times more likely to get liver cancer, one of the fastest-growing kinds. And those who have chronic liver problems, several sex partners, or share needles to use drugs have a high risk of getting hepatitis B, along with people who work with human blood. But a vaccine can prevent infection. Talk with your doctor about it if you think you’re at risk. 
Get Screened.

The sooner the warning signs of cancer are spotted, the better your odds of recovery. A variety of tests can check for different types, like breast, colon, prostate, or skin. Ask your doctor which of these screenings you should get, and when.
15 Cancer Symptoms to Know.
Changes in Your Skin.
A new spot on your skin or one that changes size, shape, or color could be a sign of skin cancer. Another is a spot that doesn't look the same as all the others on your body. If you have any unusual marks, have your doctor check your skin. They will do an exam and may remove a small piece (called a biopsy) to take a closer look for cancer cells.
Nagging Cough.

If you don't smoke, there's very little chance a nagging cough is a sign of cancer. Usually, it's caused by postnasal drip, asthma, acid reflux, or an infection. But if yours doesn't go away or you cough up blood -- especially if you are a smoker -- see your doctor. They may test mucus from your lungs or do a chest X-ray to check for lung cancer.
Breast Changes.
Most breast changes are not cancer. It's still important, though, to tell your doctor about them and check them out. Let them know about any lumps, nipple changes or discharge, redness or thickening, or pain in your breasts. They'll do an exam and may suggest a mammogram, MRI, or maybe a biopsy.
Bloating.

You may have a full, bloated feeling because of your diet or even stress. But if it doesn't get better or you also have fatigue, weight loss, or back pain, have it checked out. Constant bloating in women may be a sign of ovarian cancer. Your doctor can do a pelvic exam to look for the cause.
Problems When You Pee.

Many men have urinary issues as they get older, like the need to go more often, leaks, or a weak stream. Usually, these are signs of an enlarged prostate, but they could also mean prostate cancer. See your doctor for an exam and maybe a special blood test called a PSA test
Swollen Lymph Nodes.

You have these small, bean-shaped glands in your neck, armpits, and other places in your body. When they're swollen, it often means you're fighting an infection like a cold or strep throat. Some cancers like lymphoma and leukemia can also cause this kind of swelling. Talk to your doctor to pinpoint the cause.
Blood When You Use the Bathroom.

If you see blood in the toilet after you go, it's a good idea to talk to your doctor. Bloody stool is likely to come from swollen, inflamed veins called hemorrhoids, but there's a chance it could be colon cancer. Blood in your pee could be a problem like a urinary tract infection, but it may be kidney or bladder cancer.
Testicle Changes.

If you notice a lump or swelling in your testicles, you need to see your doctor right away. A painless lump is the most common sign of testicular cancer. Sometimes though, men may just have a heavy feeling in their lower belly or scrotum or think their testicles feel larger. Your doctor will do a physical exam of the area and may use an ultrasound scan to see if there is a tumor or another problem.
Trouble Swallowing.

The common cold, acid reflux, or even some medicine can make it hard to swallow once in a while. If it doesn’t get better with time or with antacids, see your doctor. Trouble swallowing can also be a sign of cancer in your throat or the pipe between your mouth and stomach, called the esophagus. Your doctor will do an exam and some tests like a barium X-ray, in which you swallow a chalky fluid to show your throat more clearly on the image.
Unusual Vaginal Bleeding.

Bleeding that's not part of your usual period can have many causes, like fibroids or even some types of birth control. But tell your doctor if you're bleeding between periods, after sex, or have bloody discharge. They'll want to rule out cancer of the uterus, cervix, or vagina. Be sure to let them know if you are bleeding after menopause. That's not normal and should be checked out right away.
Mouth Issues.

From bad breath to canker sores, most changes in your mouth aren't serious. But if you have white or red patches or sores in your mouth that don't heal after a couple of weeks -- especially if you smoke -- see your doctor. It may be a sign of oral cancer. Other things to look for: a lump in your cheek, trouble moving your jaw, or mouth pain.
Weight Loss.

Of course you can slim down when you change the way you eat or exercise. It can also happen if you have other issues, like stress or a thyroid problem. But it’s not normal to lose 10 pounds or more without trying. There's a chance it could be a first sign of cancer of the pancreas, stomach, esophagus, lung, or other type of cancer.
Fever.

A fever isn't usually a bad thing. Sometimes it's just a sign that your body is fighting an infection. It can also be a side effect of some medicines. But one that won't go away and doesn't have an obvious cause could be a sign of a blood cancer like leukemia or lymphoma.
Heartburn or Indigestion.

Almost everyone has this burning feeling sometimes, often because of their diet or stress. If lifestyle changes don't work and your indigestion doesn't stop, your doctor may want to do some tests to look for a cause. It could be a sign of stomach cancer.

Fatigue.

A lot of things can make you very tired, and most of them aren’t serious. But fatigue is one early sign of some cancers, like leukemia. Some colon and stomach cancers can cause blood loss that you can't see, which can make you feel very tired. If you're wiped out all the time and rest doesn't help, talk to your doctor.

Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia Phases and Treatment.
What's Happening in Your Blood?
CML affects your bone marrow, where blood cells are made. When you have this cancer, it makes a lot of abnormal white blood cells that don't fight infections well. As they build up in your body, they crowd out your healthy blood cells.
The Role of Chromosomes.

They carry genes, which tell your cells what to do. When you have CML, pieces of chromosomes 9 and 22 break and switch places. The result is a version of chromosome 22 that's called the "Philadelphia" chromosome. It carries a new gene called bcr-abl, which sets off a process that creates abnormal white blood cells.
Chronic Phase.

You probably won't have any symptoms during this period. Only a small number of abnormal white blood cells are in your blood and bone marrow, so your body is still able to fight infections. Even though you might not feel sick now, it's important to get treated so your disease doesn't get worse.
Accelerated Phase.

When you're in this stage, the number of your abnormal blood cells has increased. You may feel tired, lose weight, get short of breath, or have a fever.
Blast Phase.

The number of abnormal blood cells in your bone marrow and blood is now high. At the same time, you have fewer healthy red and white blood cells and platelets. You're more likely to get infections, and you may have anemia or bleeding that's hard to control. Without treatment, this stage can be life-threatening.
Targeting the Abnormal Protein.
You may first be treated in the chronic phase with drugs called tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). They kill off CML blood cells by blocking the protein made by the abnormal gene bcr-abl. You may have side effects like rashes and swollen skin, nausea, muscle cramps, and diarrhea. When TKIs can't control the disease, there are other treatment options.
Stem Cell Transplant.

It's an option for some people who don't respond to TKIs or other therapies. First, you get high doses of chemotherapy drugs to kill blood-forming stem cells in your bone marrow. Then, you receive stem cells from a matched donor. These will form new, healthy blood cells. A stem cell transplant has the best chance to cure CML. But newer treatments that target bcr-abl can also help many people get into remission.
Can I Get a Stem Cell Transplant?

The procedure tends to work best for people who are:

Younger rather than older
In the chronic phase
In overall good health
The high chemotherapy doses used for transplants have risks. Side effects can include infections and anemia, but as you recover, most will go away. 
Other CML Treatment Options.

If TKIs aren't working, other choices include:

Chemotherapy drugs taken by mouth to kill abnormal cells throughout your body, such as the meds hydroxyurea or busulfan
Biological drugs, like interferon, that push your immune system to fight off the cancer
New, experimental CML treatments you can try if you join a clinical trial
Check-ups.

When you have CML, you'll see your doctor at least every few months to learn how well your treatment is working and look for side effects. They may recommend that you get:

Complete blood count and bone marrow tests to measure red and white blood cells and platelets
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) test to see how many cells contain the Philadelphia chromosome
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test to look for the bcr-abl gene.
Questions About Your Treatment

When you see your doctor, ask them:

What CML phase am I in?
What are my treatment options and what side effects might I get?
Should I get a second opinion?
Can I join a clinical trial that's testing an experimental therapy?
Signs Your Treatment Is Working.

Your doctor will look for progress in these areas:

An improvement in the number of healthy white blood cells and platelets
Fewer cells with the Philadelphia chromosome in your blood and bone marrow
Fewer cells with the bcr-abl cancer gene.

Your doctor will say your disease is no longer active when:

Your blood cell count is normal
No cells with the Philadelphia chromosome can be found in your blood or bone marrow
None of the abnormal gene can be found in your blood
Being in remission isn't the same as being cured. The cancer can return.
Watch for Symptoms of a Relapse.

CML can come back even after it's been successfully treated. Warning signs of a relapse include fatigue or weakness, weight loss, fever, night sweats, bone pain, swelling or pain on the left side (a symptom of an enlarged spleen), and a feeling of fullness in the belly. Call your doctor if you notice any of these red flags.
Why Isn't My Treatment Working?

CML therapy works well for most people, but not everyone. Reasons why your treatment might stop helping include that the cancer cells change (mutate) or not enough medication gets into your bloodstream. If your treatment isn't effective, your doctor may adjust your drug doses or switch you to another therapy.
Overview
Epidemiology
Thyroid nodules are approximately 4 times more common in women than in men. Palpable nodules increase in frequency throughout life, reaching a prevalence of approximately 5% in the United States population aged 50 years and older.1–3 Nodules are even more prevalent when the thyroid gland is examined at autopsy or surgery, or when using ultrasonography, and 50% of these have nodules, which are almost always benign.2,4 New nodules develop at a rate of approximately 0.1% per year beginning in early life, but at a much higher rate (∼2% per year) after exposure to head and neck irradiation.5,6

By contrast, thyroid carcinoma is uncommon. For the United States population, the lifetime risk of being diagnosed with thyroid carcinoma is less than 1% (0.83% for women and 0.33% for men).7 Approximately 37,200 new cases of thyroid carcinoma were diagnosed in the United States in 2009.8

As with thyroid nodules, thyroid carcinoma occurs 2 to 3 times more often in women than in men. With the incidence increasing by 6.2% per year, thyroid carcinoma is currently the sixth most common malignancy diagnosed in women.8 Among persons age 15 to 24 years, thyroid carcinoma accounts for 7.5% to 10% of all diagnosed malignancies.9–11 The disease is also diagnosed more often in white North Americans than in African Americans. Although thyroid carcinoma can occur at any age, the peak incidence from 2004 to 2006 was near age 45 to 49 years in women and 65 to 69 years in men.7

Thyroid carcinoma has 3 main histologic types: differentiated (including papillary, follicular, and Hürthle cell), medullary, and anaplastic (aggressive undifferentiated tumor). Of 53,856 patients treated for thyroid carcinoma between 1985 and 1995, 80% had papillary carcinoma, 11% had follicular carcinoma, 3% had Hürthle cell carcinoma, 4% had medullary carcinoma, and 2% had anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.12 The 10-year relative survival rates for patients with papillary, follicular, and Hürthle cell carcinomas were 93%, 85%, and 76%, respectively.12 This discussion focuses on papillary, follicular, Hürthle cell, and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. Medullary thyroid carcinoma was previously published in this journal (May 2010). A complete discussion of thyroid carcinoma, including medullary thyroid carcinoma, is available online on the NCCN web site (www.NCCN.org).In 2009, approximately 1630 cancer deaths occured among persons living with thyroid carcinoma in the United States.8 Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is almost uniformly lethal; however, most thyroid carcinoma deaths are from papillary, follicular, and Hürthle cell carcinomas, which account for nearly 95% of all thyroid carcinoma cases. Although thyroid carcinoma occurs more often in women, mortality rates are higher for men, probably because men are usually older at diagnosis.7,13

The incidence of thyroid carcinoma increased almost 310% between 1950 and 2004, but mortality rates decreased more than 44%.7 From 1975 to 2004, thyroid cancer rates in the United States doubled.14 Because overall mortality has remained stable since 1975, the increasing incidence probably partially reflects earlier detection of subclinical disease (i.e., small papillary cancers), although even microcarcinomas can metastasize regionally, thereby increasing eventual recurrence risk.14,15 However, recent data show the incidence has increased across all tumor sizes.16,17 The stable age- and gender-adjusted mortality rate for thyroid carcinoma contrasts distinctly with the declining rates for other solid tumors in adults.8

The Challenge of Managing Differentiated Thyroid Carcinoma
Managing differentiated (i.e., papillary, follicular, and Hürthle cell) thyroid carcinoma can be a challenge, because no prospective randomized trials of treatment have been performed. Results from ongoing randomized trials will not be available for many years, given the typically prolonged course and relative infrequency of these tumors. Most of the information about treatment comes from studies of large patient cohorts in which therapy has not been randomly assigned. This accounts for much of the disagreement about managing differentiated carcinoma.

Nonetheless, most patients can be cured of this disease when properly treated by experienced physicians and surgeons.18 The preferred treatment is surgery, whenever possible, followed by radioiodine (131I) and thyroxine therapy in many patients. Externalbeam radiation therapy (RT) and chemotherapy have less prominent roles in managing these tumors.

Radiation-Induced Thyroid Carcinoma
Exposure to ionizing radiation is the only known environmental cause of thyroid carcinoma, usually causing papillary carcinoma. The thyroid glands of children are especially vulnerable to the carcinogenic action of ionizing radiation. A child's thyroid gland has one of the highest risks for developing cancer of any organ. In fact, the thyroid gland is the only organ linked to risk at approximately 0.10 Gy by convincing evidence.5 The risk for radiation-induced thyroid carcinoma is greater in women, certain Jewish populations, and patients with a family history of thyroid carcinoma,19 suggesting that genetic factors are also important in its development. Beginning within 5 years of irradiation, new nodules develop at a rate of approximately 2% annually, reaching a peak incidence within 30 years of irradiation but remaining high at 40 years.5,6

In adults, the risk of developing thyroid carcinoma after exposure to 131I seems to be small or nonexistent.20 After the Chernobyl nuclear reactor accident in 1986, many children developed papillary thyroid carcinoma after exposure to radioiodine fallout. It became evident that 131I and other short-lived radioiodines were potent thyroid carcinogens in children, particularly those younger than 10 years at exposure.21 Although radiation-induced papillary thyroid cancer usually appears more aggressive histologically and has high recurrence rates, the prognosis for survival is not clearly different from that of spontaneously occurring tumors.22,23 Iodine deficiency is associated with follicular and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.

Differentiated Thyroid Carcinoma
Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis
Differentiated (i.e., papillary, follicular, or Hürthle cell) thyroid carcinoma is usually asymptomatic for long periods and commonly presents as a solitary thyroid nodule. However, evaluating all nodules for malignancy is difficult, because benign nodules are so prevalent and because thyroid carcinoma is so uncommon.1,24,25 Moreover, both benign and malignant thyroid nodules are usually asymptomatic, giving no clinical clue to their diagnosis. Approximately 50% of the malignant nodules are discovered during a routine physical examination, by serendipity on imaging studies, or during surgery for benign disease. The other 50% are usually noticed first by the patient, usually as asymptomatic nodules.1,24 Regrettably, the typically indolent nature of differentiated thyroid carcinoma often leads to long delays in diagnosis that may substantially worsen the course of the disease.13

Factors Affecting Risk for Malignancy
Nodule size affects the risk for malignancy and the clinical evaluation. Thyroid nodules smaller than 1 cm occur with such frequency in the asymptomatic general population that they are often found serendipitously during imaging studies for other head or neck problems. Often termed incidentalomas, nodules smaller than 1 cm are typically clinically benign lesions and usually do not require biopsy, unless there are suspicious findings (see page 1231).4,26,27 In select cases, following up these nodules with serial ultrasounds may be reasonable. By contrast, nodules larger than 4 cm in diameter pose a somewhat higher risk for malignancy. Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) is the preferred procedure for evaluating suspicious thyroid nodules.3,25

The Society of Radiologists in Ultrasound wrote a consensus statement about managing thyroid nodules identified at thyroid ultrasonography. Their recommendations describe which nodules should undergo FNA based on nodule size and ultrasound characteristics, and on clinical features that might predict risk for morbidity from an undiagnosed malignancy.28 Suspicious criteria found using ultrasound include central hypervascularity, microcalcifications, and irregular borders.

Although more than 50% of all malignant nodules are asymptomatic, the pretest probability of malignancy in a nodule increases considerably when signs or symptoms are present (see page 1230).29 For example, the likelihood that a nodule is malignant increases approximately 7-fold if it is very firm, is fixed to adjacent structures, is growing rapidly, is associated with enlarged regional lymph nodes, or causes vocal cord paralysis, or if symptoms of invasion into neck structures are present.29,30 Family history of thyroid cancer is also indicative of malignancy. If 2 or more of these features are present, the likelihood of thyroid cancer is virtually assured; however, this is a rare situation.30

A patient's age and gender also affect the probability of malignancy. The risk of malignancy is higher in patients younger than 15 years and in men. Other factors that increase the suspicion of malignancy include 1) a history of head and neck irradiation; 2) a family history of diseases associated with thyroid carcinoma, such as, familial adenomatous polyposis (formerly called Gardner's syndrome), Carney complex, Cowden's syndrome, and multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) types 2A or 2B; 3) evidence of other thyroid cancer–associated diseases or syndromes, such as hyperparathyroidism, pheochromocytoma, marfanoid habitus, and mucosal neuromas (MEN2B), which make the presence of medullary thyroid cancer more likely; or 4) the presence of suspicious findings detected with imaging, such as focal FDG (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) uptake on PET, or central hypervascularity, irregular border, and/or microcalcifications on ultrasound.31

Initial Workup
FNA of the nodule and clinically suspicious lymph nodes is recommended as the first diagnostic test in a clinically euthyroid patient before any imaging studies are performed.1,3 Ideally, the serum thyrotropin (thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH]) results should be known before FNA is performed. This is often impractical, however, and FNA may be performed during the initial office visit. Recent data show that higher TSH levels are associated with risk for differentiated thyroid cancer.32

Some clinicians, especially in Europe,33 recommend obtaining serum calcitonin levels from all patients with thyroid nodules. However, controversy surrounds the cost-effectiveness of this practice in the United States, especially in the absence of confirmatory pentagastrin stimulation testing, and the assumptions used in cost-effective analyses. The American Thyroid Association is equivocal about measuring serum calcitonin.3,34 A recent study showed that calcitonin screening may be cost-effective in the United States.35 However, false-positive calcitonin readings that can result from minimal elevations can only be ruled out with pentagastrin testing, and pentagastrin is not available in the United States. Ultrasound of the thyroid and central neck is also recommended,36 and can also be performed on the lateral neck (category 2B).

Cytologic examination of an FNA specimen is typically categorized as 1) carcinoma (papillary, medullary, or anaplastic) or suspicious for malignancy; 2) follicular or Hürthle cell neoplasm; 3) follicular lesion of undetermined significance; 4) thyroid lymphoma; 5) benign (i.e., nodular goiter, colloid goiter, hyperplastic/adenomatoid nodule, Hashimoto's thyroiditis); or 6) insufficient biopsy (nondiagnostic) (see page 1231). These diagnostic categories for FNA results reflect the NCI's State-of-the-Science Conference held in 2007.37

Pathology and cytopathology slides should be reviewed at the treating institution by a pathologist with expertise in diagnosing thyroid disorders. Although FNA is a very sensitive test, particularly for papillary carcinoma, false-negative results are sometimes obtained; therefore, a reassuring FNA should not override concerns in the presence of worrisome clinical findings.38 Hürthle cell neoplasms can sometimes mimic medullary carcinoma cytologically and on frozen section. Discriminating between anaplastic thyroid cancer and other primary thyroid malignancies (e.g., medullary carcinoma, thyroid lymphoma) or poorly differentiated cancer metastatic to the thyroid can sometimes be difficult.39 Metastatic renal carcinoma can mimic a follicular neoplasm, melanoma can mimic medullary carcinoma, and metastatic lung cancer can mimic anaplastic carcinoma of the thyroid (http://thyroidfna.cancer.gov/pages/conclusions/).

Pathology synoptic reports (protocols) are useful for reporting results from examinations of surgical specimens. The NCCN Thyroid Carcinoma Panel supports pathology synoptic reports from the College of American Pathologists (CAP) and the Association of Directors of Anatomic and Surgical Pathology (ADASP). Some pathologists currently use a modified format that is believed to comply with both of these synoptic reports. Although no ADASP checklist has been published for thyroid carcinoma, the CAP protocol information and checklists (updated in October 2009) can be accessed on the CAP Web site (http://www.cap.org).

On January 1, 2004, the Commission on Cancer (COC) of the American College of Surgeons mandated the use of specific checklist elements of the protocols as part of its Cancer Program Standards for Approved Cancer Programs. Therefore, pathologists should familiarize themselves with these documents. The CAP protocol checklist complies with the COC requirements.

FNA is far less able to discriminate follicular and Hürthle cell carcinomas from benign adenomas, because diagnosis of these malignancies requires demonstration of vascular or capsular invasion.25 Thus, follicular and Hürthle cell carcinomas are rarely diagnosed on FNA.18,40 Nodules that yield an abundance of follicular cells with little or no colloid are nearly impossible to categorize as benign or malignant based on FNA. Surgical biopsy is advisable, because approximately 20% of these lesions are follicular carcinomas.29 Male gender, older patient age, and larger nodule size may increase the likelihood of a malignant diagnosis at surgery as high as 80%, whereas female gender, younger age, and smaller nodule size may reduce the risk as low as 5%. Repeat FNA will not resolve the diagnostic dilemma. Before thyroidectomy is performed, however, serum TSH level and thyroid 123I or 99m technetium scanning may identify patients with an autonomously functioning or “hot” nodule who often may be spared surgery, because the diagnosis of follicular adenoma is highly likely.41

Clinically euthyroid patients with a low TSH and a hot nodule on thyroid imaging should be evaluated and treated for thyrotoxicosis as indicated, even when cytology is suspicious for follicular neoplasm; those with a “cold” nodule should proceed to surgery (see page 1231).2,3 Patients with a high or normal TSH and cytology suspicious for follicular or Hürthle cell neoplasm should undergo diagnostic lobectomy. Total thyroidectomy should be considered for bilateral disease, unilateral disease greater than 4 cm (especially in men), or if the patient prefers this approach.

An FNA that yields insufficient cellular material for diagnosis and is solid should be repeated, because approximately 50% of subsequent specimens are adequate to assign a diagnosis.29 In patients with serial nondiagnostic aspirates, 5% of women and 30% of men may have malignant nodules.42 Nodules yielding benign cytology do not require repeat FNA unless the nodules show evidence of growth.29

When a diagnosis of thyroid carcinoma is promptly established using FNA, the tumor is often confined to the thyroid or has metastasized only to regional nodes, thus providing ample opportunity for cure. However, as many as 5% of patients with papillary carcinoma and up to 10% of those with follicular or Hürthle cell carcinoma have tumors that aggressively invade structures in the neck or have produced distant metastases. These cancers are difficult to cure.

Recurrence of Differentiated Thyroid Carcinoma
Depending on initial therapy and other prognostic variables, approximately 30% of patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma have tumor recurrences during several decades; 66% of these recurrences occur within the first decade after initial therapy.13 Although not usually fatal, a recurrence in the neck is serious and must be regarded as the first sign of a potentially lethal outcome.43,44 In one large study, central neck recurrences were seen most often in the cervical lymph nodes (74%), followed by the thyroid remnant (20%), and then the trachea or muscle (6%). Of the group with local recurrences, 8% eventually died of cancer.13 Distant metastases were the sites of recurrence in 21% of this patient cohort, most often (63%) in the lungs alone. Of the patients with distant metastases, 50% died of cancer.13

Age, Stage, and Sex at Diagnosis
Although many factors influence the outcome of patients with papillary and follicular thyroid carcinomas, patient age at the time of initial therapy and tumor stage are important.13,45–47 Age is the most important prognostic variable for thyroid cancer mortality. However, thyroid cancer is more aggressive in men. Thyroid carcinoma is more lethal in patients older than 40 years, and is increasingly so with each subsequent decade of life. The mortality rate increases dramatically after age 60 years (see Figure 1; available online, in these guidelines, at www.NCCN.org [MS-29]). However, tumor recurrence shows a remarkably different behavior with respect to age. Recurrence frequencies are highest (40%) among patients younger than 20 or older than 60 years, whereas at other ages it occurs in only approximately 20% of patients.13,45–48 This disparity between cancer-related mortality and the frequency of tumor recurrence probably accounts for most of the profound disparity of opinion among clinicians concerning optimal treatment for patients with differentiated thyroid cancer. How clinicians assess the importance of tumor recurrence (as opposed to cancer-specific survival) accounts for much of the debate surrounding the influence of age on the treatment plan for children and young adults.

Children typically present with more advanced disease and experience more tumor recurrences after therapy than adults, but their prognosis for survival is good.49,50 Although the prognosis of children with thyroid carcinoma is favorable for long-term survival (90% at 20 years), the standardized mortality ratio is 8-fold higher than predicted.51 Some authors believe that young age affects survival so favorably that it overshadows the behavior expected from the characteristics of the tumor. Therefore, they classify most thyroid tumors as low-risk tumors that may be treated with lobectomy alone.52–54 However, most treating physicians believe that tumor stage and its histologic features should be as significant as patient age in determining management.13,49,55,56

Prognosis is less favorable in men, but the difference is usually small.13,54 One study found that gender was an independent prognostic variable for survival and that the risk for death from cancer was approximately twice as high in men as in women.13 Because of this risk factor, men with thyroid carcinoma, especially those older than 40 years, may be regarded with special concern.57

Familial Syndromes
Familial, nonmedullary thyroid carcinoma accounts for about 5% of papillary carcinomas and, in some cases, may be clinically more aggressive than the sporadic form.58,59 Microscopic familial papillary thyroid carcinoma tends to be multifocal and bilateral, often with vascular invasion, lymph node metastases, and high rates of recurrence and distant metastases.60 Other familial syndromes associated with papillary thyroid carcinoma are familial adenomatous polyposis,61 Carney complex (multiple neoplasia and lentiginosis syndrome, which affects endocrine glands),62 and Cowden's syndrome (multiple hamartomas).63 The prognosis for all of these syndromes is not different from that for spontaneously occurring papillary thyroid carcinoma.

Tumor Variables Affecting Prognosis
Some tumor features have a profound influence on prognosis.48,64–66 The most important features are tumor histology, primary tumor size, local invasion, necrosis, vascular invasion, BRAF mutation status, and metastases.

Histology: Although survival rates with typical papillary carcinoma are good, cancer-specific mortality rates vary considerably with certain histologic subsets of tumors.1 A well-defined tumor capsule, which is found in approximately 10% of papillary thyroid carcinomas, is a particularly favorable prognostic indicator. A worse prognosis is associated with 1) anaplastic tumor transformation; 2) tall-cell papillary variants, which have a 10-year mortality of up to 25%; 3) columnar variant papillary carcinoma (a rapidly growing tumor with a high mortality rate); and 4) diffuse sclerosing variants, which infiltrate the entire gland.18,67 Follicular-variant papillary thyroid carcinoma (FVPTC), which is recognized by its follicular architecture and typical papillary cytology, does not seem to have a worse prognosis than the pure papillary lesions if the FVPTC is encapsulated.48,67–69

Follicular carcinoma is typically a solitary encapsulated tumor that may be more aggressive than papillary carcinoma. It usually has a microfollicular histologic pattern, and is identified as cancer through follicular cell invasion of the tumor capsule and/or blood vessels. The latter has a worse prognosis than capsular penetration alone.70 Many follicular carcinomas are minimally invasive tumors, exhibiting only slight tumor capsular penetration without vascular invasion. They closely resemble follicular adenomas and are less likely to produce distant metastases or cause death.71 FNA or frozen section study cannot differentiate a minimally invasive follicular carcinoma from a follicular adenoma. Therefore, the tumor is often simply referred to as a follicular neoplasm by the cytopathologist (see page 1231). Cancer may be diagnosed only after thyroidectomy and when analysis of the permanent histologic sections shows tumor capsule invasion by follicular cells.

Highly invasive follicular carcinomas are much less common; they are sometimes recognized at surgery by their invasion of surrounding tissues and extensive invasion of blood vessels. Up to 80% of these cancers metastasize, causing death in as many as 20% of patients, often within a few years of diagnosis.48 The poor prognosis is closely related to the patient's older age at diagnosis, advanced tumor stage, and larger tumor size.13

The mortality for papillary and follicular carcinomas is similar in patients of comparable age and disease stage. Both cancers have an excellent prognosis if the tumors are confined to the thyroid, small, and minimally invasive. Papillary and follicular carcinomas have far less favorable outcomes if they are highly invasive or develop distant metastases.13,72 Staging for patients with papillary and follicular carcinoma who are older than 45 years was revised in the 2002 guidelines (6th edition) from the American Joint Commission on Cancer (AJCC; available online, in these guidelines, at www.NCCN.org [ST-1]).73 Note that new staging guidelines from the AJCC (7th edition) were effective after January 1, 2010, and will be reflected in the 2011 NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines) for Thyroid Carcinoma (available at www.NCCN.org).74 Many studies (including those discussed in this manuscript) have used AJCC-TNM staging from earlier editions, such as the 5th edition,75 and not the 6th or 7th editions.73,74

When Hürthle (oncocytic) cells constitute most or all of a malignant tumor's mass, the disease is often classified as Hürthle cell carcinoma, although the WHO classification considers it a variant of follicular carcinoma.76 Molecular studies suggest, however, that this tumor may be more similar to papillary than follicular carcinomas.77 Benign and malignant Hürthle cell tumors usually cannot be discriminated by FNA or frozen section examination, although large (> 4 cm) tumors are more likely to be malignant than smaller ones.78 Hürthle cell carcinomas may be aggressive, especially when vascular invasion or large tumors occur in older patients.79,80 Some believe these cancers are not much more aggressive than similarly staged follicular carcinomas without Hürthle cells.81 In the National Cancer Data Base report, the 10-year relative survival rates were 85% for follicular carcinomas and 76% for Hürthle cell carcinoma.12

In 2 large series, pulmonary metastases occurred in 25% and 35% of patients with Hürthle cell carcinoma, approximately twice the frequency of follicular carcinoma metastases.82,83 Fewer Hürthle cell carcinomas concentrate 131I compared with papillary or follicular carcinomas. In a series of 100 patients with distant metastases, 131I uptake by pulmonary metastases was seen in more than 50% of the follicular (64%) and papillary (60%) carcinomas but in only 36% of Hürthle cell carcinomas.84

Primary Tumor Size: Papillary carcinomas smaller than 1 cm, termed incidentalomas or microcarcinomas, are typically found incidentally after surgery for benign thyroid conditions. Their recurrence and cancer-specific mortality rates are near zero.85

Other small papillary carcinomas become clinically apparent. For example, approximately 20% of microcarcinomas are multifocal tumors that commonly metastasize to cervical lymph nodes. Some researchers report a 60% rate of nodal metastases from multifocal microcarcinomas,86 which may be the presenting feature and also may be associated with distant metastases.85 Otherwise, small (< 1.5 cm) papillary or follicular carcinomas confined to the thyroid almost never cause distant metastases. Furthermore, recurrence rates after 30 years are one third of those associated with larger tumors; 30-year cancer-specific mortality is 0.4% compared with 7% (P < .001) for tumors 1.5 cm or larger.13 In fact, the prognosis for papillary and follicular carcinomas is incrementally poorer as tumors increase in size.72,87 A linear relationship exists between tumor size and recurrence or cancer-specific mortality for both papillary and follicular carcinomas (Figure 2; available online, in these guidelines, at www.NCCN.org [MS-29]).13

Local Tumor Invasion: Up to 10% of differentiated thyroid carcinomas invade through the outer border of the gland and grow directly into surrounding tissues, increasing both morbidity and mortality. Local invasion may be microscopic or gross, and can occur with both papillary and follicular carcinomas.13,88 Recurrence rates are 2 times higher with locally invasive tumors, and as many as 33% of patients with these tumors die of cancer within a decade.13,89

Lymph Node Metastases: In one review, nodal metastases were found in 36% of 8029 adults with papillary carcinoma, 17% of 1540 patients with follicular carcinoma, and up to 80% of children with papillary carcinoma.48 An enlarged cervical lymph node may be the only sign of thyroid carcinoma. In these patients, multiple nodal metastases are usually found at surgery.90

The prognostic importance of regional lymph node metastases is controversial. Some studies show that the presence of regional lymph node metastases has no effect on recurrence or survival.52–54 Other studies find that nodal metastases are a risk factor for local tumor recurrence and cancer-specific mortality and that nodal metastases correlate with distant metastases, especially if bilateral cervical or mediastinal lymph node metastases are present or if the tumor invades through the lymph node capsule.13,47,91 In one study, 15% of patients with cervical node metastases died of thyroid carcinoma (P < .02), whereas all patients without cervical node metastases survived.92 Another study of patients with distant metastases from papillary carcinoma reported that 80% had mediastinal node metastases when cancer was diagnosed.93 Still another study found that patients with papillary or follicular carcinoma who had cervical or mediastinal lymph node metastases had a significantly (P < .01) higher 30-year cancer-specific mortality (10%) than those without metastases (6%).13

Distant Metastases: Distant metastases are the principal cause of death from papillary and follicular carcinomas. Almost 10% of patients with papillary carcinoma and up to 25% of those with follicular carcinoma develop distant metastases. Approximately 50% of these metastases are present at diagnosis.48 Distant metastases occur even more often in patients with Hürthle cell cancer (35%) and those diagnosed after age 40 years.82,84 The sites of reported distant metastases among 1231 patients in 13 studies were lung (49%), bone (25%), both lung and bone (15%), and the central nervous system (CNS) or other soft tissues (10%). The main predictors of outcome for patients with distant metastases are patient age and the tumor's metastatic site, ability to concentrate 131I, and morphology on chest radiograph.82,84,94,95

Although some patients, especially younger ones, with distant metastases survive for decades, approximately 50% die within 5 years regardless of tumor histology.48 Even so, some pulmonary metastases are compatible with long-term survival. For example, one study found that when distant metastases were confined to the lung, more than 50% of the patients were alive and disease-free at 10 years, whereas no patients with skeletal metastases survived that long.96 The survival rates are highest in young patients with diffuse lung metastases seen only on 131I imaging and not on radiograph,95,96 which seems to be the most important feature governing an improved survival rate and prolonged disease-free interval with lung metastases.97 Prognosis is worse with large pulmonary metastases that do not concentrate 131I and is intermediate with small nodular metastases that are seen on radiographs but that do concentrate 131I.82,84,94

Tumor Staging and Prognostic Scoring Strategies
Several staging and clinical prognostic scoring strategies use patient age older than 40 years as a major feature to identify cancer mortality risk from differentiated thyroid carcinoma.46,52,73,98 When applied to the papillary carcinoma data from the Mayo Clinic, 4 of the schemes that use age—EORTC, TNM 5th edition (tumor, node, metastasis), AMES (age, metastases, extent, and size), and AGES (age, tumor grade, extent, and size)—were effective in separating patients at low-risk (in whom the 20-year, cancer-specific mortality was 1%) from those at high-risk (in whom the 20-year, cancer-specific mortality was 30%–40%).87 However, in patients with incrementally worsening MACIS (metastasis, age, completeness of resection, invasion, and size) scores of less than 6, 6 to 6.99, 7 to 7.99, and 8 or more, the 20-year survival rates decreased from 99% to 89%, 56%, and 24%, respectively.52 Notably, only “completeness of resection” is subject to intervention, and its contribution to prognosis is small.

Unfortunately, a study that classified 269 patients with papillary carcinoma according to 5 different prognostic paradigms found that some patients in the lowest risk group from each approach died of cancer.55 This is particularly true of classification schemes that simply categorize patients dichotomously as low or high risk.73,99 The AJCC TNM staging approach (see Table 1; available online, in these guidelines, at www.NCCN.org [ST-1]), which is perhaps the most widely used indicator of prognosis, classifies tumors in all patients younger than 45 years as stage I or II, even those with distant metastases. Although it predicts cancer mortality reasonably well,100,101 TNM staging was not established to predict recurrence and therefore does not accurately forecast the recurrences that often occur in patients who develop thyroid cancer when they are young. Two studies have shown the poor predictive value of most staging approaches for thyroid carcinoma, including the TNM system.46,102

Differentiated thyroid cancer staging systems are of value in epidemiology studies and as tools to stratify patients for prospective trials.103 Staging systems, which are designed to segregate patients based on survival, offer gross indications of prognosis for groups of patients but are probably less useful in determining treatment for individual patients. When treating differentiated thyroid cancer, to which most patients do not succumb, many clinicians have emphasized potential morbidity more than mortality.

Systems designed to predict survival provide little guidance with respect to morbidity sustained by patients who are likely to be cured by their treatments. These NCCN Guidelines do not use TNM stages to guide therapy, but instead, many tumor and patient characteristics play important roles in the recommendations. Many specialists in thyroid cancer also follow this paradigm.

Surgical Management of Differentiated Thyroid Carcinoma
Ipsilateral Lobectomy Versus Total Thyroidectomy: The continuing debate surrounding the appropriate extent of thyroid resection reflects the limitations of prognostic scoring54 and the morbidity often associated with total thyroidectomy performed outside of referral centers. Patients treated at the Mayo Clinic for low-risk papillary thyroid carcinomas (MACIS score ≤ 3.99) showed no improvement in survival rates after undergoing procedures more extensive than ipsilateral lobectomy; thus, Hay et al.104 concluded that more aggressive surgery was indicated only for those with higher MACIS scores.However, cancer-specific mortality and recurrence rates after unilateral or bilateral lobectomy were assessed in patients with papillary carcinoma considered to be low risk according to AMES criteria.105 No significant differences were found in cancer-specific mortality or distant metastasis rates between the 2 groups, but the 20-year frequencies of local recurrence and nodal metastasis after unilateral lobectomy were 14% and 19%, respectively, which were significantly higher (P = .0001) than the frequencies of 2% and 6% seen after bilateral thyroid lobe resection. Based on these observations, Hay et al.105 concluded that bilateral thyroid resection is the preferable initial surgical approach for patients with AMES low-risk papillary carcinoma.

Most NCCN panel members (and other authors) advise total thyroidectomy for all patients preoperatively diagnosed with thyroid carcinoma,3,18,106 because these procedures are associated with improved disease-free survival, even in children and adults with low-risk tumors.43,56,105,107 Some centers report that patients treated with lobectomy alone have a 5% to 10% recurrence rate in the opposite thyroid lobe48,104 with an overall long-term recurrence rate of more than 30% (compared with 1% after total thyroidectomy and 131I therapy)13 and the highest frequency (11%) of subsequent pulmonary metastases.108 Higher recurrence rates are also observed with cervical lymph node metastases and multicentric tumors, providing some additional justification for more complete initial thyroid resection.13

However, some prominent thyroid cancer specialists (including some at NCCN Member Institutions) oppose this view and advocate unilateral lobectomy for most patients with papillary and follicular thyroid carcinoma based on both the low mortality among patients categorized as low risk according to the AMES and other prognostic classification schemes (i.e., most patients), and the high complication rates reported with more extensive thyroidectomy.53,98,109 The large thyroid remnant after unilateral lobectomy, however, may complicate long-term follow-up with serum thyroglobulin (Tg) determinations and whole-body 131I imaging. In most clinical settings, decisions about the extent of thyroidectomy should be individualized and made together with the patient. Circumstances in which unilateral thyroidectomy is inadvisable are detailed in the NCCN Guidelines for Thyroid Carcinoma (to view the most recent version of these guidelines, visit the NCCN Web site at www.NCCN.org).

NCCN panelists believe that total lobectomy alone is adequate treatment for papillary microcarcinomas if the patient has not been exposed to radiation, has no other risk factors, and has a tumor smaller than 1 cm that is unifocal and confined to the thyroid without vascular invasion.13,85 The same is true for minimally invasive follicular cancers (see page 1239).

Completion Thyroidectomy: Completion thyroidectomy is recommended when remnant ablation is anticipated or if long-term follow-up with serum Tg determinations with or without whole-body 131I imaging is planned, because large thyroid remnants are difficult to ablate with 131I.108 This procedure has a complication rate similar to that of total thyroidectomy. Some experts recommend completion thyroidectomy for routine treatment of tumors 1 cm or larger, because approximately 50% of patients with cancers this size have additional cancer in the contralateral thyroid lobe.88,110–114 In patients with local or distant tumor recurrence after lobectomy, cancer is found in more than 60% of the resected contralateral lobes.111

Miccoli et al.56 found that 61% of irradiated children from Chernobyl who developed thyroid carcinoma treated with lobectomy had unrecognized lung or lymph node metastases that could only be identified after completion thyroidectomy. In another study, patients who underwent completion thyroidectomy within 6 months of their primary operation developed significantly fewer lymph node and hematogenous recurrences, and survived significantly longer than those whose second operation was delayed for more than 6 months.112

Surgical Complications: The most common significant complications of thyroidectomy are hypoparathyroidism and recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, which occur with much higher frequency after total thyroidectomy. Transient clinical hypoparathyroidism after surgery is common in adults115 and children56,116 undergoing total thyroidectomy. However, the rates of persistent hypocalcemia are reported to be much lower in the hands of experienced thyroid surgeons. In a review of 7 published surgical series, the average rates of long-term recurrent laryngeal nerve injury and hypoparathyroidism, respectively, were 3% and 2.6% after total thyroidectomy and 1.9% and 0.2% after subtotal thyroidectomy.117 One study reported hypocalcemia in 5.4% of patients immediately after total thyroidectomy, persisting in only 0.5% of patients 1 year later.118

When experienced surgeons perform thyroidectomies, complications occur at a lower rate. A study of 5860 patients treated in the state of Maryland found that surgeons who performed more than 100 thyroidectomies per year had the lowest overall complication rate (4.3%), whereas surgeons who performed fewer than 10 thyroidectomies per year had 4 times as many complications.119

Radioactive Iodine
Adjuvant Radioiodine Therapy: Postoperative 131I thyroid remnant ablation is performed when a tumor has the potential to recur.120 Studies show decreased recurrence and disease-specific mortality when postoperative 131I therapy is administered as part of the initial treatment, but the supportive data are largely confined to higher-risk populations.13,47,55,121,122 In a study assessing outcomes in 1004 patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma, tumor recurrence was approximately 3-fold higher in patients either treated with thyroid hormone alone or given no postoperative medical therapy when compared with those who underwent postoperative thyroid remnant ablation with 131I (P < .001). Moreover, fewer patients developed distant metastases (P < .002) after thyroid remnant 131I ablation than after other forms of postoperative treatment; however, this effect is observed only in patients with primary tumors 1.5 cm or more in diameter.121 Some experts may find that remnant ablation has a less therapeutic effect because more extensive locoregional surgery had been performed.87

Debate continues about ablating the thyroid bed with 131I after total thyroidectomy.87,121 Proposed mechanisms through which remnant ablation may decrease recurrences and disease-specific mortality include the ablation of normal tissue destined to become malignant, ablation of residual microscopic malignancy in the remnant, ablation of residual microscopic malignancy outside the remnant, ablation of residual malignancy outside the remnant obscured by uptake in a large thyroid remnant, and the demonstration of unsuspected residual malignancy on the posttherapy imaging, which alters disease stage and promotes further patient management. Several other reasons favor remnant ablation: 1) patient follow-up is simplified, because elimination of “thyroid bed” uptake eliminates misinterpretation of it as disease; 2) normal tissue is eliminated as a source of Tg production, which facilitates identification of patients who are disease-free and may simplify their care while promoting early identification of those with residual cancer; and 3) elimination of normal tissue may eliminate the nidus for continued confounding anti-Tg antibody production. However, long-term evaluation of recurrence risk after adjuvant radioiodine may be confounded by the accompanying improved specificity of diagnostic testing after elimination of the thyroid remnant, and the possibility that patients who undergo adjuvant therapy may be more likely to undergo more intensive follow-up testing.

Diagnostic Whole-Body Imaging and Thyroid Stunning: Whole-body 131I imaging may be performed (category 2B) after surgery when indicated to assess the completeness of thyroidectomy and whether residual disease is present (see page 1236). However, a phenomenon termed stunning may occur when imaging doses of 131I induce follicular cell damage.123 Stunning decreases uptake in the thyroid remnant or metastases, thus impairing the therapeutic efficacy of subsequent 131I.124

The use of 123I or small (2 or 3 mCi) doses of 131I and/or a shortened interval of not more than 72 hours between the diagnostic 131I dose and the therapy dose has been recommended to avoid or reduce the stunning effect; however, 123I is more expensive and smaller 131I doses have reduced sensitivity when compared with larger 131I doses.123–125 Some experts recommend that diagnostic 131I imaging be avoided completely with decisions based on the combination of tumor stage and serum Tg.123 Other experts advocate that the whole-body 131I diagnostic imaging may alter therapy when, for example, unsuspected metastases are identified or an unexpectedly large remnant is identified that requires additional surgery or a reduction in radioiodine dosage to avoid substantial radiation thyroiditis.3,123,126,127

Administration of Radioiodine Therapy: Historically, the 3 methods of determining 131I therapy activities (doses) have included empiric fixed doses, quantitative dosimetry, and upper bound limits that are set by blood dosimetry.3,123,128 Recently a fourth method that adjusts the activity to deliver a selected dose to the blood (as a surrogate of the activity available for the remnant or target tissue) became available using simplified single–time point whole-body dosimetry (Kloos, personal communication).

Previously, hospitalization was required for administering therapeutic doses of 131I larger than 30 mCi (1110 MBq). However, this is no longer necessary in most states, because a change in federal regulations permits the use of much larger 131I doses in ambulatory patients.128

Fixed 131I Doses: Administration of a fixed dose of 131I is the most widely used and simplest method. Most clinics use this method regardless of the percentage uptake of 131I in the remnant or metastatic lesion. Patients with uptake in tumor are routinely treated with large, fixed amounts of 131I. Lymph node metastases may be treated with approximately 100 to 175 mCi (3700–6475 MBq) of 131I. Cancer growing through the thyroid capsule and incompletely resected is treated with 150 to 200 mCi (5550–7400 MBq). Patients with distant metastases are usually treated with 200 mCi (7400 MBq) of 131I, which typically will not induce radiation sickness or produce serious damage to other structures but may exceed generally accepted safety limits to the blood in elder patients and those with impaired kidney function.129,130 Diffuse pulmonary metastases that concentrate 50% or more of the diagnostic dose of 131I (which is very uncommon) are treated with 150 mCi (5550 MBq) of 131I or less to avoid lung injury, which may occur when more than 80 mCi remain in the whole body 48 hours after treatment. The administered activity of radioiodine therapy should be adjusted for pediatric patients.

Quantitative Tumor 131I Dosimetry: A second method is to use quantitative dosimetry methods to estimate the amount of radiation delivered to the lesion per unit of 131I administered. This approach is attractive, because radiation exposure from arbitrarily fixed doses of 131I can vary substantially. When the calculated dose to the tumor is less than 3500 cGy, the cancer is unlikely to respond to 131I therapy.128,131 Radioiodine activities that deliver more than 30,000 cGy to the residual normal tissue and more than 8000 cGy to metastatic foci are likely to be effective. It is necessary to serially measure the radiation activity in the target using a tracer dose and to estimate the tumor size to make these calculations, which is difficult to do and is impossible in the setting of diffuse or microscopic lung metastases.

Blood 131I Dosimetry: A third method is to administer a dose calculated to deliver a maximum of 200 cGy to the blood, while keeping the whole-body retention less than 120 mCi (4440 MBq) at 48 hours or less than 80 mCi (2960 MBq) when diffuse pulmonary uptake is present.132 Thyroid cancer dosimetry and radioiodine therapy with doses more than 200 mCi are best performed in medical centers with experience using these treatments.

Posttreatment 131I Imaging: When 131I therapy is given, whole-body radioiodine imaging should be performed several days later to document 131I uptake by the tumor, primarily because up to 25% of this imaging shows lesions that may be clinically important that were not detected on the diagnostic imaging.128 A study of pre- and posttreatment imaging showed that these differed in 27% of the treatment cycles, but only 10% of the posttreatment imaging showed clinically significant new foci of metastatic disease.133 Posttreatment imaging was most likely to reveal clinically important new information in patients younger than 45 years who had previously undergone 131I therapy. Conversely, in older patients and patients who had not previously undergone 131I therapy, posttreatment imaging rarely yielded new information that might have altered the patient's prognosis.133 Thus, the panel only gives a category 2B recommendation for posttreatment radioiodine imaging.

Assessment and Management After Initial Treatment
Serum Tg determinations, neck ultrasound, and whole-body 131I imaging detect recurrent or residual disease in most patients who have undergone total thyroid ablation.134 In contrast, neither serum Tg or whole-body radioiodine imaging is specific for thyroid cancer in patients who have not undergone thyroidectomy and remnant ablation. When initial ablative therapy has been completed, serum Tg should be measured periodically. Serum Tg can be measured while the patient is taking thyroxine, but the test is more sensitive when thyroxine has been stopped or when recombinant human TSH (rhTSH) is given to increase the serum TSH.135,136 Using current Tg assays, patients with measurable serum Tg levels during TSH suppression and those with stimulated Tg levels more than 2 ng/mL are likely to have residual/recurrent disease that may be localized promptly in almost 50% of patients and over the next 3 to 5 years in an additional 30%.137 Approximately 6% of patients with detectable serum Tg levels, which are less than 2 ng/mL after stimulation, experience recurrences over the next 3 to 5 years, whereas this is true for approximately 2% of patients with completely undetectable serum Tg after stimulation. Conversely, the long-term clinical significance is uncertain for disease only detected through minimally elevated Tg levels after stimulation.

rhTSH: During follow-up, periodic withdrawal of thyroid hormone therapy traditionally has been required to increase the serum TSH concentrations sufficiently to stimulate thyroid tissue so that serum Tg measurements (with or without 131I imaging) could be performed to detect residual thyroid tissue or carcinoma. An alternative to thyroid hormone withdrawal is the administration of rhTSH intramuscularly, which stimulates thyroidal 131I uptake and Tg release while the patient continues thyroid hormone suppressive therapy and avoids symptomatic hypothyroidism.138

A second multicenter international study was performed to assess the effects of 2 rhTSH dosing schedules on whole-body 131I imaging and serum Tg levels when compared with imaging and Tg levels obtained after thyroid hormone withdrawal. The imaging method in this study was more carefully standardized and accounted for the fact that 131I retention was higher in patients rendered hypothyroid than in patients given rhTSH.136 Imaging was concordant in 89% of the patients and superior in 4% after rhTSH, and superior in 8% of patients after thyroid hormone withdrawal, but these differences were not statistically significant. The main finding in this study was that the combination of rhTSH-stimulated whole-body imaging and serum Tg measurements detected 100% of metastatic carcinoma.136 In this study, 0.9 mg of rhTSH was given intramuscularly every day for 2 days, followed by a minimum of 4 mCi of 131I on the third day. Whole-body imaging and Tg measurements were performed on the fifth day. Whole-body 131I images were acquired after 30 minutes of imaging or after obtaining 140,000 counts, whichever came first. A serum Tg of 2.0 ng/mL or higher obtained 72 hours after the last rhTSH injection indicates that thyroid tissue or thyroid carcinoma is present, regardless of the whole-body imaging findings.136,139

rhTSH is well tolerated. Nausea (10.5%) and transient mild headache (7.3%) are its main adverse effects.136 It is associated with significantly fewer symptoms and dysphoric mood states than hypothyroidism induced by thyroid hormone withdrawal.138

Measuring Serum Tg: Serum Tg measurement is the best means of detecting thyroid tissue. Tg should be measured when TSH has been stimulated either by thyroid hormone withdrawal or by rhTSH, when serum Tg has a lower false-negative rate than whole-body 131I imaging.135–137,140 Serum Tg levels vary in response to the increase in serum TSH after thyroid hormone withdrawal or rhTSH stimulation. Serum Tg generally does not rise as high after rhTSH administration as after withdrawal of thyroid hormone. The conditions for rhTSH-stimulated whole-body 131I imaging stipulate using 4-mCi 131I doses (based on the doses used in the pivotal phase III trial)136 and an imaging time of 30 minutes or until 140,000 counts are obtained.

The sensitivity and specificity of various Tg assays, however, vary widely in different laboratories, even with the use of an international standard (CRM 457).141,142 Therefore, experts recommend that patients undergo Tg monitoring using the same Tg assay performed in the same laboratory. Ideally, serum is frozen and saved for future analyses if needed, especially if a change in Tg assay is necessary.

Anti-Tg antibodies should be measured in the serum sample taken for Tg assay because these antibodies (which are found in up to 25% of patients with thyroid carcinoma) invalidate serum Tg measurements in most assays.143 These antibodies typically falsely lower the Tg value in immunochemiluminometric (ICMA) and immunoradiometric (IRMA) assays, while raising the value in older radioimmunoassay. Although the clinical importance of these antibodies is unclear, their persistence for more than 1 year or so after thyroidectomy and radioiodine ablation probably indicates the presence of residual thyroid tissue and possibly an increased risk for recurrence.143 In one study, 49% of patients with undetectable serum Tg concentrations and serum anti-Tg antibody concentrations of 100 U/mL or more experienced a recurrence, compared with only 3% of patients with undetectable serum Tg concentrations and serum anti-Tg antibody concentrations of less than 100 U/mL.144 In patients with coexistent autoimmune thyroid disease at surgery, anti-Tg antibodies may persist much longer. In a study of 116 patients with anti-Tg antibodies before thyroidectomy, antibodies remained detectable for up to 20 years in some patients without detectable thyroid tissue, and the median time to disappearance of antibodies was 3 years.145

Heterophile antibodies may falsely increase or decrease serum Tg measurements in the absence of anti-Tg antibodies. Clues to the presence of a false Tg elevation are the lack of Tg rise with TSH stimulation and the lack of linear results with serum sample dilution. Heterophile blocking tubes may be used to correct this problem.

RNA-based detection strategies, including the sodium–iodine symporter, TSH receptor, and Tg mRNAs, or DNA-based strategies to detect thyroid oncogenes in peripheral blood, represent current areas of active research that may improve the detection of residual cancer and the monitoring of these patients, especially during thyroxine treatment or when circulating anti-Tg antibodies are present.146–149

Treating Tg-Positive/Image-Negative Patients: Posttreatment 131I imaging may indicate the location of metastases when the serum Tg level is increased, but a tumor (or metastases) cannot be found by physical examination or other localizing techniques (i.e., diagnostic 131I imaging, neck ultrasonography, CT, MRI, or PET). Pulmonary metastases may be found only after administering therapeutic doses of 131I and obtaining whole-body imaging within a few days of treatment.150 In a study of 283 patients treated with 100 mCi (3700 MBq) of 131I, 6.4% had lung and bone metastases detected after treatment that had been suspected based on high serum Tg concentrations alone but had not been detected after 2-mCi (74 MBq) diagnostic imaging.151 In another study in 17 patients with increased serum Tg concentrations and negative 5-mCi (185 MBq) diagnostic imaging, 16 patients showed 131I uptake after 75 to 140 mCi (2775–5180 MBq) of 131I; more than 50% of these patients had lung metastases.152

Unfortunately, most diagnostic imaging–negative/Tg-positive patients are not rendered disease-free from 131I therapy; however, the tumor burden may be diminished.153 Thus, most patients with residual or recurrent disease confined to the neck undergo reoperation rather than radioiodine therapy with the hope of a higher chance for cure. Radioiodine therapy is more commonly considered for those with distant metastases or inoperable local disease. Patients not benefiting from this therapy can be considered for clinical trials, especially those patients with progressive metastatic disease. When a large tumor is not visible on diagnostic whole-body imaging, its ability to concentrate 131I is very low; thus, the tumor will not respond to 131I therapy.

Currently, the Tg level recommended for empiric treatment is approximately 10 ng/mL.150,154 However, no study has shown a decrease in morbidity or mortality in patients treated with 131I based on increased Tg measurements alone. In a long-term follow-up study, no survival advantage was associated with empiric high-dose radioiodine in patients who had a negative image.155 Furthermore, potential long-term side effects (i.e., xerostomia, nasolacrimal duct stenosis, bone marrow and gonadal compromise, risk for hematologic and other malignancies) may negate any benefit.120,156

Thyroid Hormone Suppression of TSH: Because TSH is a trophic hormone that can stimulate the growth of cells derived from thyroid follicular epithelium, the use of levothyroxine to maintain low TSH levels is considered optimal for treating patients with papillary, follicular, or Hürthle cell carcinoma.3,157 However, data are lacking to permit precise specification of the appropriate serum levels of TSH. In general, patients with known residual carcinoma or those at high risk for recurrence should have their TSH levels maintained near the lower limit of the reference range (either slightly below or slightly above). Patients who remain disease-free for several years can probably have their TSH levels maintained within the reference range. The risk and benefit of TSH-suppressive therapy must be balanced for each individual patient because of the potential toxicities associated with TSH-suppressive doses of levothyroxine, including cardiac tachyarrhythmias (especially in the elderly), bone demineralization (particularly in postmenopausal women), and frank symptoms of thyrotoxicosis.3 Patients whose TSH levels are chronically suppressed should be counseled to ensure an adequate daily intake of calcium (1200 mg/d) and vitamin D (1000 units/d).

Decreased recurrence and cancer-specific mortality rates for differentiated thyroid carcinoma are reported by some authors for patients treated with thyroid hormone suppressive therapy.13,121,157–161 The average dosage needed to attain serum TSH levels in the euthyroid range is higher in patients with thyroid carcinoma (2.11 mcg/kg per day) than in those with spontaneously occurring primary hypothyroidism (1.62 mcg/kg per day),160 and still higher doses are required to suppress serum TSH in patients with thyroid carcinoma. Still, the optimal TSH level to be achieved in patients with thyroid carcinoma is uncertain. Superior outcomes were associated with aggressive thyroid hormone suppression therapy in high-risk patients but were achieved with modest suppression in patients with stage II disease.161 Excessive TSH suppression (into the undetectable, thyrotoxic range) is not required to prevent disease progression in all patients with differentiated thyroid cancer.

Adjuvant External-Beam RT: No prospective controlled trials have been completed using adjuvant external-beam RT.162 One retrospective study showed a benefit of adjuvant external-beam RT after radioactive iodine in patients older than 40 years with invasive papillary thyroid cancer (T4) and lymph node involvement (N1).163 Local recurrence and locoregional and distant failure were significantly improved. A second study showed improved cause-specific survival and local relapse-free rate in selected patients treated with adjuvant external-beam RT (in addition to total thyroidectomy and TSH-suppressive therapy with thyroid hormone) for papillary thyroid carcinoma with microscopic residuum. Not all patients underwent radioactive iodine therapy.47 Benefit was not shown in patients with follicular thyroid carcinoma or other subgroups of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Similarly, patients with microscopic residual papillary carcinoma after surgery are more commonly rendered disease-free after undergoing external RT (90%) than when they do not (26%).164 In another study, patients with microscopically invasive follicular carcinoma were also more often disease-free after surgery when postoperative external RT was given (53%) than when it was not (38%)164; however, these patients had not received radioactive iodine. Similar benefit was shown among patients treated with radioactive iodine alone and those treated with it after surgery.164

Chemotherapy, External-Beam Radiation, and Surgical Excision of Metastases: Isolated skeletal metastases should be considered for surgical excision or external irradiation. Brain metastases pose a special problem, because 131I therapy may induce cerebral edema. Neurosurgical resection can be considered for brain metastases. For solitary lesions, either neurosurgical resection or stereotactic radiosurgery is preferred. Once brain metastases are diagnosed, disease-specific mortality is very high (67%), with one retrospective study showing a reported median survival of 12.4 months. Survival was significantly improved after surgical resection of one or more tumor foci.165

Life-threatening tumors refractory to all other forms of therapy may be palliatively treated with doxorubicin, although the response rate is poor.48 The experience with chemotherapy in patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma is limited, because most recurrent tumors respond well to surgery, 131I therapy, or external-beam RT. Chemotherapy is mainly used for tumors that are not surgically resectable, are not responsive to 131I, and have either been treated with or are not amenable to therapy with external-beam RT. Among 49 patients with metastatic differentiated thyroid carcinoma who were treated with 5 chemotherapy protocols, only 2 (3%) patients experienced objective responses.166 In a review of published series, 38% of patients experienced a response (defined as a decrease in tumor mass) to doxorubicin.167 Combination chemotherapy is not clearly superior to doxorubicin therapy alone.48 Overall, traditional cytotoxic systemic chemotherapy (e.g., doxorubicin) has minimal efficacy in patients with metastatic differentiated thyroid disease.

Several phase II trials are evaluating novel treatments for patients with metastatic differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Although 12-month progression-free survival was only 3% in one study assessing celecoxib (400 mg twice daily) in patients with progressive, radioiodine-unresponsive disease,168 38% of the patients had stable disease, representing a possible alteration in their disease course. Other agents are now in clinical trials, including 1) multitargeted kinase inhibitors, such as motesanib diphosphate (AMG-706),169,170 sorafenib,171–173 sunitinib,174,175 axitinib,176 and vandetanib; 2) the histone deacetylase inhibitors, vorinostat and depsipeptide; 3) the DNA methylation inhibitor, decitabine; 4) the heat-shock protein 90 (HSP-90) inhibitor, 17allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG); 5) the proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib; and 6) a derivative of thalidomide, lenalidomide.177,178 Recent reviews of the completed phase II clinical trials suggest that tyrosine kinase inhibitors have a clinical benefit (partial response rates plus stable disease) in 50% to 60% of subjects, usually for 12 to 24 months.179,180

Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma
Surgical Therapy
A CT/MRI should be performed if the lesion is fixed or substernal (iodinated contrast should be avoided unless essential). A thyroid ultrasound (including lateral neck) is recommended if not previously performed. In one report, cervical ultrasound performed before primary surgery for newly diagnosed disease identified metastatic sites not appreciated on physical examination in 20% of patients, and surgical strategy was altered in many patients.181 Vocal cord mobility should also be evaluated. A chest radiograph can be considered.

The panel members agreed on the characteristics of patients who require total thyroidectomy and neck dissection (if lymph nodes are palpable or biopsy positive) as the primary treatment (see page 1233). If the nodes are negative, prophylactic central neck dissection can be considered (category 2B) but is not required in all cases.182–184

Panel members did not agree about the preferred primary surgery for patients who are assumed to be at lower risk for cancer-specific mortality. Most panel members opted for total thyroidectomy (category 2B) in any patient in whom papillary thyroid carcinoma was identified preoperatively or during surgery. However, a few panel members felt strongly that, initially, lobectomy plus isthmusectomy (category 2B) is adequate surgery for patients at lower risk. A study in more than 5000 patients found that survival of patients after partial thyroidectomy was similar to survival after total thyroidectomy for both low- and high-risk patients.185 However, another study in 2784 patients with differentiated thyroid cancer (86% with papillary thyroid cancer) found that total thyroidectomy was associated with increased survival in high-risk patients.161 A more recent study in 52,173 patients found that, compared with lobectomy, total thyroidectomy improves survival in patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma greater than 1 cm.186

For patients who undergo lobectomy plus isthmusectomy (lower-risk patients), completion of thyroidectomy is warranted for aggressive variant disease, macroscopic multifocal disease, positive isthmus margins, cervical lymph node metastases, or gross extrathyroidal extension. Aggressive variant disease is defined as tall cell variant, columnar cell, or poorly differentiated features.

The panel agreed that completion of thyroidectomy is appropriate for any large tumor (> 4 cm), positive margins, gross extrathyroidal extension, macroscopic multifocal disease, or confirmed nodal metastases. Incidentally discovered papillary carcinomas measuring 1 to 4 cm may warrant a completion thyroidectomy (category 2B) for an aggressive variant (see page 1234); observation is another option for these patients (i.e., with Tg measurement plus anti-Tg antibodies). The TSH levels of these patients should be suppressed with levothyroxine therapy (see page 1232). Lobectomy is sufficient for tumors resected with negative margins, no contralateral lesion, no suspicious lymph node, or small (< 1 cm) papillary carcinomas found incidentally on the final pathology sections during thyroid surgery for benign disease; these patients are observed (i.e., with Tg measurement plus anti-Tg antibodies). Levothyroxine therapy to reduce serum TSH to low or low-normal concentrations is recommended for these patients.

Radioactive Iodine
Postoperative Whole-Body 131I Diagnostic Imaging: Performing diagnostic whole-body 131I imaging with adequate TSH stimulation (thyroid withdrawal or rhTSH stimulation) before 131I therapy is a category 2B recommendation (see page 1236). The panel advises that this decision be weighed against the problem of stunning that occurs with diagnostic 131I imaging.187 Diagnostic whole-body 123I imaging does not carry a risk for stunning. The alternatives to performing diagnostic 131I imaging are to obtain an 123I image before 131I therapy, obtain a thyroid uptake measurement with microcurie quantities of radioiodine to confirm neck uptake, or forgo diagnostic imaging. If radioiodine is administered after a diagnostic 131I study, the interval between radioiodine doses should be minimized. Whenever therapeutic radioiodine is administered, whole-body imaging should be obtained 5 to 8 days after treatment with 131I, which is termed posttreatment 131I imaging in the guidelines.

Thyroid Remnant Ablation With Radioactive Iodine: The decision to ablate uptake in the thyroid bed is closely linked to the extent of thyroid surgery and is not recommended for patients who have undergone lobectomy or lobectomy plus isthmusectomy as initial surgery. Adjuvant radioiodine ablation (30–100 mCi) to destroy residual thyroid function is recommended for suspected (based on pathology, postoperative Tg, and intraoperative findings) or proven thyroid bed uptake in patients who have undergone total thyroidectomy and have no gross residual disease in the neck (see page 1236). The administered activity of radioiodine therapy should be adjusted for pediatric patients. The panel does not routinely recommend empiric administration of radioiodine without diagnostic imaging.

Radioactive Iodine Treatment: Therapy with 131I is advised for patients with tumors found on examination, by imaging studies, or through increased serum Tg levels if the tumors are not amenable to surgical removal and if they concentrate 131I. All patients should be examined, and palpable neck disease should be surgically resected before any radioiodine treatment. A negative pregnancy test is required before the administration of radioiodine in women of childbearing potential. The panel agrees that radioiodine treatment is not needed for patients with Tg levels less than 1 ng/mL, negative radioiodine imaging, and negative anti-Tg antibodies. For patients with suspected or proven radioiodine responsive residual tumor, radioiodine treatment can be given at 100 to 200 mCi along with posttreatment imaging; dosimetry can be considered for distant metastases (see page 1236). Again, the administered activity of radioiodine therapy should be adjusted for pediatric patients.

For unresectable locoregional recurrence, radioiodine treatment with RT can be given if the radioiodine imaging is positive; RT alone is another option in the absence of radioiodine uptake. When recurrent disease is suspected based on high stimulated Tg values (> 10 ng/mL) and negative imaging studies (including PET scans), radioiodine therapy can be considered (category 3) using an empiric fixed dose of 100 to 150 mCi of 131I (see page 1237); however, there was major disagreement about this recommendation. For patients with metastatic disease that is not locoregional, the panel recommends individualized treatment based on the tumor locations (e.g., CNS, bone, or sites other than CNS; see page 1238).

Adjuvant External-Beam RT
The guidelines recommend that external RT be considered for patients older than 45 years with T4 (surgically evident gross extrathyroidal extension) and without gross residual disease in their neck (see page 1236).

Thyroxine Suppression of TSH
Thyroxine therapy is required after total thyroid resection, and is advisable even after lobectomy and isthmusectomy. The level of TSH suppression is not stipulated, because data currently conflict. Practically, the most appropriate dose of thyroid hormone for most low-risk patients with differentiated thyroid cancer is one that decreases the serum TSH concentration to just below the lower limit of the normal range (see page 1232).3 At a minimum, patients should not be permitted to have increased TSH levels, because this would represent inadequate treatment of both postsurgical hypothyroidism and differentiated thyroid carcinoma. A greater degree of TSH suppression is generally recommended for higher-risk patients, including those with metastatic disease.3 The risk and benefit of TSH-suppressive therapy must be balanced for each patient. Patients whose TSH levels are chronically suppressed should be counseled to ensure an adequate daily intake of calcium (1200 mg/d) and vitamin D (1000 units/d).

Surveillance and Maintenance
The guidelines recommend the following for surveillance and maintenance (see page 1237): 1) physical examination, TSH, Tg, and anti-Tg antibody measurements every 6 to 12 months, then annually if patients remain disease-free; 2) periodic neck ultrasound; 3) TSH-stimulated Tg (without radioiodine imaging) in patients previously treated with radioiodine with negative TSH-suppressed Tg and negative anti-Tg antibodies; 4) consider TSH-stimulated radioiodine imaging in patients with T3–4 or M1 at initial staging, or with abnormal Tg levels (either TSH-suppressed or TSH-stimulated), abnormal anti-Tg antibodies, or abnormal ultrasound during surveillance; 5) whole-body 131I imaging every 12 months until no response is seen to radioiodine treatment in iodine responsive tumors (either withdrawal of thyroid hormone or rhTSH) for patients with detectable Tg, distant metastases, or soft tissue invasion on initial staging; and 6) consider additional nonradioiodine imaging (e.g., FDG-PET with or without CT) if Tg levels are ≥ 10 ng/mL for patients whose 131I imaging is negative and stimulated Tg is more than 2 to 5 ng/mL.

The panel acknowledges that the suggested Tg cutoff levels will continue to evolve as new Tg assays are introduced. In selected patients who may be at higher risk for residual or recurrent disease (e.g., those with N1 disease), a stimulated Tg should be obtained and concomitant diagnostic radioiodine (RAI) imaging considered. In patients with a positive stimulated Tg, concomitant RAI imaging may help determine whether treatment with RAI is indicated (i.e., RAI is often beneficial in iodine-avid disease but not in non-iodine avid disease; see page 1237). A subgroup of very–low-risk patients (micropapillary carcinomas entirely confined to the thyroid gland) may only require periodic ultrasound follow-up, without stimulated Tg or follow-up whole-body imaging, as long as the basal Tg remains low (see page 1237).

Recurrent and Metastatic Disease
The panel agrees that the preferred therapy for recurrent disease is surgery if the tumor can be localized and is resectable (see page 1237). Preoperative vocal cord assessment should be considered for those with central neck recurrence. For unresectable locoregional recurrences, 131I therapy is recommended for tumors that concentrate 131I (i.e., radioiodine imaging–positive), and external-beam RT alone is recommended for those that do not (i.e., radioiodine imaging–negative). Unresectable iodine-responsive locoregional disease that is unlikely to respond to radioiodine therapy alone may also be treated with external-beam RT.

For metastatic disease, several therapeutic approaches are recommended (see page 1238), depending on the site and number of tumor foci. Patients should continue to receive levothyroxine to suppress TSH levels. For skeletal metastases, surgical palliation is recommended for symptomatic or asymptomatic tumors in weight-bearing extremities; other therapeutic options are 131I treatment (if the radioiodine imaging is positive) with consideration of dosimetry to maximize dosing and/or external-beam RT. Intravenous bisphosphonate (pamidronate or zoledronic acid) therapy may be considered for symptomatic bone metastases, and embolization of metastases can also be considered.188 For metastases to the CNS, neurosurgical resection should be considered for appropriate cases, and/or radioiodine treatment (with rhTSH and steroid prophylaxis) if the radioiodine imaging is positive (with consideration of dosimetry to maximize dosing), and/or image-guided RT (see page 1238). For solitary CNS lesions, either neurosurgical resection or stereotactic radiosurgery is preferred.

For sites other than the CNS, surgical resection and/or RT of selected, enlarging, or symptomatic metastases can be considered, and/or 131I is recommended if the tumor concentrates the radioisotope (with consideration of dosimetry to maximize the dosing). For clinically progressive or symptomatic disease, patients should consider 1) clinical trials; 2) small molecule kinase inhibitors (i.e., sorafenib or sunitinib) or systemic therapy if a clinical trial is not available; or 3) best supportive care.189 Because chemotherapy has been generally disappointing, the guidelines recommend clinical trials for non–radioiodine avid tumors; sorafenib, sunitinib, or traditional cytotoxic systemic therapy can be considered if a clinical trial is not available.3,171,173 Several agents are currently being investigated in clinical trials (http://www.thyroidtrials.org, http://www.nci.nih.gov/clinicaltrials).

Follicular Thyroid Carcinoma
Because the diagnosis and treatment of papillary and follicular carcinoma are similar, only the important differences in the management of follicular carcinoma are highlighted. The diagnosis of follicular carcinoma requires evidence of invasion through the capsule of the nodule. Thus, FNA is not specific for follicular thyroid carcinoma (unlike papillary carcinoma) and accounts for the main differences in management of the 2 tumor types. The FNA cytologic diagnosis of follicular neoplasm is a benign follicular adenoma in 80% of cases. However, 20% of patients with follicular neoplasms are ultimately diagnosed with follicular thyroid carcinoma when the final pathology is assessed. Further diagnostic and treatment decisions for patients who present with follicular neoplasms are based on their TSH levels (see page 1231).

Because most patients with follicular neoplasms have benign disease, total thyroidectomy is recommended only if invasive cancer or metastatic disease is apparent at surgery or if the patient chooses total thyroidectomy to avoid a second procedure if cancer is found at pathologic review. Otherwise, lobectomy plus isthmusectomy is advised as the initial surgery. If invasive follicular carcinoma (extensive vascular invasion) is found on the final histologic sections after lobectomy plus isthmusectomy, prompt completion of thyroidectomy is recommended (see page 1239).

Completion thyroidectomy is also recommended for tumors that, on final histologic sections after lobectomy plus isthmusectomy, are minimally invasive follicular carcinomas; minimally invasive cancer is characterized as a well-defined tumor with microscopic capsular and/or a few foci of vascular invasion, and often requires examination of at least 10 histologic sections.190 These tumors may also be simply observed carefully, because minimally invasive follicular carcinomas have an excellent prognosis. However, deaths attributed to minimally invasive follicular carcinoma occur occasionally. For patients who have a central neck recurrence, preoperative vocal cord assessment should be considered (see page 1242).

The other features of management and follow-up for follicular carcinoma are identical to those of papillary carcinoma, with the exception that adjuvant RT is not used as an adjuvant measure postoperatively for advanced lesions (i.e., T4). However, RT is used for unresectable gross residual disease in the neck. As for papillary carcinoma, adjuvant radioiodine ablation to destroy residual thyroid function is recommended for suspected or proven thyroid bed uptake. Radioiodine treatment and posttreatment imaging (with consideration of dosimetry for distant metastasis) may be administered for suspected or proven radioiodine responsive residual tumor (see page 1241). The decision to perform diagnostic whole-body 131I imaging with adequate TSH stimulation (thyroid withdrawal or rhTSH stimulation) before 131I therapy is administered is a category 2B recommendation for both follicular and papillary carcinoma.

Hürthle Cell Carcinoma
A Hürthle cell tumor (also known as oxyphilic cell carcinoma) is usually assumed to be a variant of follicular thyroid carcinoma, although the prognosis of Hürthle cell carcinoma is worse.80,191 The Hürthle cell variant of papillary carcinoma is rare and seems to have a prognosis similar to follicular thyroid carcinoma.192

The management of this Hürthle cell (oxyphilic) carcinoma is almost identical to follicular carcinoma, except that 1) locoregional nodal metastases occur frequently, and therefore therapeutic compartment lymph node dissections may be needed for positive nodes, or prophylactic (category 2B) central neck compartment dissection may be considered for negative nodes; and 2) metastatic Hürthle cell tumors are less likely to concentrate 131I. For patients who have a central neck recurrence, preoperative vocal cord assessment should be considered (see page 1247).

Adjuvant RT can be considered postoperatively for advanced Hürthle cell lesions (i.e., T4; see page 1246), similar to the management for papillary carcinoma. Nonetheless, adjuvant radioiodine therapy has been reported to decrease the risk for locoregional recurrence and is recommended for unresectable disease with positive radioiodine imaging. Radioiodine therapy (100–150 mCi) should be considered (category 2B) after thyroidectomy for patients with stimulated Tg levels of more than 10 ng/mL who have negative scans (including FDG-PET; see page 1247).80 The panel recommends (category 2B) that diagnostic whole-body 131I imaging with adequate TSH stimulation (thyroid withdrawal or rhTSH stimulation) be performed before 131I therapy is administered. However, patients with clinical indications for radioiodine therapy (suspicion based on pathology, postoperative Tg, and intraoperative findings) may not require imaging (category 2B; see page 1246). Postoperative RT may be used for advanced lesions.

Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma
Medullary thyroid carcinoma was previously published in this journal (May 2010). A complete discussion of thyroid carcinoma, including medullary thyroid carcinoma, is available online on the NCCN Web site (www.NCCN.org).

Anaplastic Thyroid Carcinoma
Anaplastic thyroid carcinomas are aggressive undifferentiated tumors, with a disease-specific mortality approaching 100%.193 Patients with anaplastic carcinoma are older than those with differentiated carcinomas, with a mean age at diagnosis of approximately 71 years.194 Fewer than 10% of patients are younger than 50 years, and 60% to 70% of patients are women.45,194 The incidence of anaplastic carcinoma is decreasing.193

Approximately 50% of patients with anaplastic carcinoma have either a prior or coexistent differentiated carcinoma. Anaplastic carcinoma develops from more differentiated tumors as a result of one or more de-differentiating steps, particularly loss of the p53 tumor suppressor protein.195 No precipitating events have been identified, and the mechanisms leading to anaplastic transformation of differentiated carcinomas are uncertain. Differentiated thyroid carcinomas can concentrate iodine, express TSH receptor, and produce Tg, whereas poorly differentiated or undifferentiated carcinomas typically do not. Therefore, radioiodine imaging cannot be used and radioiodine treatment is not effective in these patients.

Patients with anaplastic carcinoma present with extensive local invasion, and distant metastases are found at initial disease presentation in 15% to 50% of patients.190,196 The lungs and pleura are the most common site of distant metastases, being present in up to 90% of patients with distant disease. Approximately 5% to 15% of patients have bone metastases; 5% have brain metastases; and a few have metastases to the skin, liver, kidneys, pancreas, heart, and adrenal glands. All anaplastic carcinomas are considered stage IV (A, B, or C; see Table 1; available online, in these guidelines, at www.NCCN.org [ST-1]). The T4 category includes T4a tumors, which are intrathyroidal and surgically resectable, and T4b tumors, which are extrathyroidal and not surgically resectable. However, clinically apparent anaplastic tumors are usually unresectable.

The diagnosis of anaplastic carcinoma is usually established through core or surgical biopsy. However, discriminating between anaplastic thyroid cancer and other primary thyroid malignancies (i.e., medullary thyroid carcinoma, thyroid lymphoma) or poorly differentiated cancer metastatic to the thyroid can occasionally be difficult.39 Diagnostic procedures include a complete blood cell count, serum calcium, and TSH level. CT scans of the neck can accurately determine the extent of the thyroid tumor and can identify tumor invasion of the great vessels and upper aerodigestive tract structures.197 CT images of the head, chest, abdomen, and pelvis are used to establish the extent of distant metastases. Bone scans and FDG-PET scans can be considered. Bone metastases are usually lytic.

Treatment and Prognosis
No effective therapy exists for anaplastic carcinoma, and the disease is almost uniformly fatal. The median survival from diagnosis ranges from 3 to 7 months.198 The 1- and 5-year survival rates are approximately 17% and 8%, respectively.196,198 Death is attributable to upper airway obstruction and suffocation (often despite tracheostomy) in 50% of these patients, and to a combination of complications of local and distant disease and/or therapy in the remaining patients. Patients with disease confined to the neck at diagnosis have a mean survival of 8 months compared with 3 months if the disease extends beyond the neck.199 Other variables that may predict a worse prognosis include older age at diagnosis, male sex, and dyspnea as a presenting symptom.

Except for patients whose tumors are small and confined entirely to the thyroid or readily excised structures, total thyroidectomy with attempted complete tumor resection has not been shown to prolong survival.198–201 External-beam RT can increase short-term survival in some patients; RT can also improve local control and can also be used for palliation (e.g., to prevent asphyxiation).193,202 Treatment with single-drug chemotherapy also does not improve survival or disease control in the neck, although perhaps 20% of patients experience some response in distant metastases. The introduction of hyperfractionated RT, combined with radiosensitizing doses of doxorubicin, may increase the local response rate to approximately 80%, with subsequent median survival of 1 year. Distant metastases then become the leading cause of death.203 Similar improvement in local disease control has been reported with a combination of hyperfractionated RT and doxorubicin, followed by debulking surgery in patients with responsive disease.204 However, the addition of larger doses of other chemotherapeutic drugs has not been associated with improved control of distant disease or survival. Paclitaxel has been tested in newly diagnosed patients and may provide some palliative benefit.205,206

Once the diagnosis of anaplastic carcinoma is confirmed pathologically, the panel recognizes the importance of rapidly determining the potential for local resection.193 If the disease is deemed likely to be resectable, an attempt at total thyroidectomy should be made, with selective resection of all involved local or regional structures and nodes. The patency of the airway should be considered throughout the patient's course. Given the poor outcome with current standard therapy, all patients, regardless of surgical resection, should be considered for clinical trials. Currently, ongoing clinical trials include combretastatin A4 phosphate (CA4P; a vascular disrupting agent), CS-7107 (an oral PPAR gamma [peroxisome proliferator–activated receptors] agonist), and novel multitargeted therapies, including bevacizumab with doxorubicin, sorafenib, sunitinib, and imatinib (http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?term=thyroid+cancer).178,207,208 A patient with anaplastic thyroid cancer had a durable complete response in a phase I trial with CA4P, and has been disease-free for more than 3 years.209,210 Recent data using fosbretabulin, which is another vascular disrupting agent, in 26 patients with advanced anaplastic thyroid cancer showed that 33% of patients survived more than 6 months.211

Multimodality therapy should also be considered. Although optimal results have been reported with hyperfractionated RT combined with chemotherapy, the panel acknowledged that considerable toxicity is associated with this treatment and that prolonged remission is uncommonly reported.212 A recent study found that surgery and RT were associated with improved survival, but not chemotherapy.213 The guidelines do not recommend particular chemotherapeutic agents, either for radiosensitization or full-dose therapy, because of a lack of clear evidence of efficacy for any particular regimen.NCCN: Continuing Education
Accreditation Statement
This activity is designated to meet the educational needs of physicians, nurses, and pharmacists involved in the management of patients with cancer. There is no fee for this article. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) is accredited by the ACCME to provide continuing medical education for physicians. NCCN designates this journal-based CE activity for a maximum of 1.0 AMA PRA Category 1 Credit(s)™. Physicians should claim only the credit commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity.

NCCN is accredited as a provider of continuing nursing education by the American Nurses Credentialing Center’s Commission on Accreditation.

NCCN designates this educational activity for a maximum of 1.0 contact hour. Accreditation as a provider refers to recognition of educational activities only; accredited status does not imply endorsement by NCCN or ANCC of any commercial products discussed/displayed in conjunction with the educational activity. Kristina M. Gregory, RN, MSN, OCN, is our nurse planner for this educational activity.

Overview
In 2014, approximately 62,980 new cases of thyroid carcinoma will be diagnosed and approximately 1890 cancer deaths will occur from the disease in the United States.1,2 The main histologic types of thyroid carcinoma include (1) differentiated (including papillary, follicular, and Hürthle cell); (2) medullary (MTC); and (3) anaplastic (aggressive undifferentiated tumor). Of 55,554 patients diagnosed with thyroid carcinoma between 2007 and 2011, 88.0% had papillary carcinoma, 5.5% had follicular carcinoma, 2.3% had Hürthle cell carcinoma, 1.8% had MTC, and 0.9% had anaplastic carcinoma.3 Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is almost uniformly lethal, but most thyroid carcinoma deaths are from papillary, follicular, or Hürthle cell carcinomas, which account for 95% of all thyroid carcinoma cases. However, most patients can be cured of differentiated thyroid carcinoma when properly treated by experienced physicians and surgeons,4 with a 5-year survival rate of 97.8%.3
Differentiated Thyroid Carcinoma
First-line preferred treatment for differentiated thyroid carcinoma is surgery, whenever possible, followed by radioactive iodine (RAI) in selected patients, and levothyroxine therapy in all patients (see THYR-A, page 1673).5 However, some patients have metastatic or recurrent disease that cannot be treated with surgery and/or is resistant to RAI. For patients with metastatic disease, the NCCN Thyroid Carcinoma Panel recommends individualized treatment based on tumor location, such as bone, central nervous system, or soft tissue (see PAP-9, page 1675). Although not curative, systemic and/or locoregional therapy may be recommended for patients with symptomatic and/or progressive disease that is not amenable to treatment with RAI.5–7

Systemic therapy includes kinase inhibitors, cytotoxic chemotherapy, and novel agents available on clinical trials. Treatment of locoregional disease depends on the site and includes external-beam radiation therapy (EBRT), resection, stereotactic radiotherapy, and other therapies (see PAP-9, page 1675).5,8–13 Systemic therapy can be considered for tumors that are not surgically resectable, are not responsive to RAI, are not amenable to EBRT, and have shown clinically significant structural disease progression during the past 6 to 12 months.7,14

Traditional cytotoxic systemic chemotherapy, such as doxorubicin, has minimal efficacy in patients with metastatic differentiated thyroid disease.15,16 Among 49 patients treated with 5 chemotherapy protocols, only 2 patients (3%) had objective responses.17 In a review of published series, 38% of patients had a response (defined as a decrease in tumor mass) to doxorubicin.18 Combination chemotherapy is not clearly superior to doxorubicin therapy alone.19 A recent study showed that targeted therapy of the MAP kinase pathway with selumetinib (an MEK inhibitor) significantly increased the effectiveness of RAI therapy in patients who were previously RAI-refractory.20
Kinase Inhibitors
Novel systemic therapies for patients with metastatic differentiated thyroid carcinoma have been evaluated.7,14,21–24 Multitargeted kinase inhibitors that are currently recommended in the NCCN Guidelines for Thyroid Carcinoma (to view the complete version, visit NCCN.org) for select patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma include sorafenib,25–32 sunitinib,29,33 vandetanib,34 pazopanib, and axitinib35,36 (see PAP-9, above).37 For the 2014 update of the NCCN Guidelines, a new section on “Principles of Kinase Inhibitor Therapy in Advanced Thyroid Cancer” was added to assist with using these novel targeted agents (see THYR-B, page 1674). This new section also pertains to patients with MTC. Other revisions to the recommended multikinase inhibitors are discussed in the following paragraphs. Novel agents under investigation include other multitargeted kinase inhibitors, such as lenvatinib, and BRAF (V600E) mutation inhibitors, such as vemurafenib.13,14,38–42

Clinical trials suggest that kinase inhibitors have a clinical benefit (partial response rates plus stable disease) in 50% to 60% of patients, usually for approximately 12 to 24 months.14,29,37,43–45 Patients with rapidly progressive disease may benefit from kinase inhibitor therapy even if they experience side effects.7 Kinase inhibitor therapy may cause severe side effects, and therefore may not be appropriate for patients with stable or slowly progressive indolent disease.6,7,32,46 Watchful waiting may be appropriate for asymptomatic patients with indolent disease.47 Severe or fatal side effects from kinase inhibitors include bleeding, hypertension, stroke, and liver toxicity; however, most side effects can be managed and are reversible with discontinuation of the drug.32,48–52 Dose modification and dose holds of the kinase inhibitors may enable patients to continue therapy (see the prescribing information). The dose of levothyroxine often needs to be increased in patients taking kinase inhibitors.46,47 Because some kinase inhibitors are metabolized by cytochrome P450 isoenzymes, patients are at risk for drug-drug interactions.53 Patients should be cautioned not to drink grapefruit juice if they are taking kinase inhibitors such as sunitinib, pazopanib, or axitinib.
Kinase inhibitor therapy may be used to treat thyroid carcinoma that is symptomatic and/or progressive and not amenable to treatment with RAI. For the 2014 update, recommendations were revised for the use of kinase inhibitors. Sorafenib may be considered for select patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma; other kinase inhibitors are also an option (see PAP-9, page 1675). Sorafenib may be considered for progressive and/or symptomatic differentiated thyroid carcinoma based on a recent phase III randomized trial and a recent FDA approval.25,32,54 For the 2014 update, sorafenib was from a footnote and into the algorithm based on this information (see PAP-9, page 1675).25 If patients need to discontinue sorafenib because they have severe side effects, do not experience response to sorafenib, or experience progression on sorafenib, then other commercially available small molecule kinase inhibitors may also be considered, including pazopanib, sunitinib, vandetanib, or axitinib, although none have been approved by the FDA for differentiated thyroid cancer (see PAP-9, page 1675).55–57 For the 2014 update, vandetanib and axitinib were added to the footnote as additional recommended kinase inhibitors that may also be considered based on results from recent phase II trials.34–36 In addition, pazopanib was changed from a category 2B recommendation to a category 2A recommendation based on results of a phase II trial and on panel experience.37 locally advanced and metastatic MTC that is structurally progressive (see MEDU-6 and MEDU-7, page 1676 and above, respectively).58–61 MTC cells do not concentrate RAI, and MTC does not respond well to conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy. Therefore, iodine-131 imaging cannot be used, and RAI treatment is not effective in these patients. Postoperative levothyroxine is indicated for all patients; however, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) suppression is not appropriate because C cells lack TSH receptors. Thus, TSH should be kept in the normal range by adjusting the levothyroxine dose.62
Kinase Inhibitors
Kinase inhibitors may be recommended for select patients with MTC who have recurrent or persistent disease that is unresectable and structurally progressive (see MEDU-6 and MEDU-7, page 1676 and above, respectively).63–65 Multitargeted kinase inhibitors that are currently recommended or may be considered for select patients with MTC include vandetanib, cabozantinib, sorafenib, and sunitinib (see MEDU-6 and MEDU-7, page 1676 and above respectively). Vandetanib and cabozantinib are oral kinase inhibitors that increase progression-free survival (PFS) in patients with metastatic MTC.58,61,66–68 The NCCN Thyroid Carcinoma Panel recommends vandetanib or cabozantinib (both are category 1) for select patients with MTC based on recent phase III trials and FDA approval.58–61 Severe or fatal side effects from kinase inhibitors include bleeding, hypertension, and liver toxicity; however, many side effects can be managed.46,49,55,69 Because some patients may have indolent and asymptomatic disease, these agents may not be appropriate (see THYR-B, page 1674).63 Locoregional therapies, such as resection, ablation, and EBRT, are also recommended for the treatment of MTC (see MEDU-6 and MEDU-7, page 1676 and above, respectively).62,65

Vandetanib is a multitargeted kinase inhibitor that inhibits RET, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), and endothelial growth factor receptor.58 In the phase III randomized ZETA trial for unresectable, locally advanced, or metastatic MTC (N=331), vandetanib increased PFS compared with placebo (hazard ratio [HR], 0.46; 95% CI, 0.31–0.69; P<.001); overall survival data are not yet available.58 Vandetanib was FDA-approved for use in patients with locally advanced or metastatic MTC who are not eligible for surgery and whose disease is causing symptoms or growing.58,59 However, access to vandetanib is restricted through a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) program because of potential cardiac toxicity69; other adverse events may also occur.69,70

Cabozantinib is a multitargeted kinase inhibitor that inhibits RET, VEGFR-2, and MET. In a recent phase III randomized trial (EXAM) for patients with locally advanced or metastatic MTC (N=330), cabozantinib increased median PFS compared with placebo (11.2 vs 4.0 months; HR, 0.28; 95% CI, 0.19–0.40; P<.001); overall survival data are not yet available.61 The FDA recently approved the use of cabozantinib for patients with progressive metastatic MTC.60,61,71,72 Rare adverse events with cabozantinib include severe bleeding and gastrointestinal perforations or fistulas; severe hemorrhage is a contraindication for use of this agent.63 If disease progresses on vandetanib or cabozantinib, systemic chemotherapy can be administered using dacarbazine or combinations that include dacarbazine.62,73,74 EBRT can be used for focal symptoms. Bisphosphonate therapy or denosumab can be considered for bone metastases.75–77 Best supportive care is also recommended.

Sorafenib or sunitinib can be considered, although not FDA-approved for MTC, if vandetanib, cabozantinib, or clinical trials are not available or appropriate (see MEDU-6 and MEDU-7, pages 1676 and 1677, respectively).33,78–86 In patients with metastatic MTC, sorafenib reduces symptoms caused by hypercalcitonemia and metastases.78,80 Sunitinib was associated with clinical response in several case reports.81,85,86 Clinical trials are assessing the effectiveness of novel multitargeted therapies, such as pazopanib.87 Summary
These NCCN Guidelines Insights focus on some of the major updates to the 2014 NCCN Guidelines for Thyroid Carcinoma. Kinase inhibitor therapy may be used to treat thyroid carcinoma that is symptomatic and/or progressive and not amenable to treatment with RAI. Sorafenib may be considered for select patients with metastatic differentiated thyroid carcinoma, whereas vandetanib or cabozantinib may be recommended for select patients with metastatic MTC. Other kinase inhibitors may be considered for select patients with either type of thyroid carcinoma. A new section on kinase inhibitors was added to the NCCN Guidelines to assist with using these novel targeted agents.
Hepatobiliary Cancers.
Abstract
BACKGROUND
Bone cancer pain is very common, and patients with this type of pain may be difficult to treat. Development of an experimental model for studying this condition is critical to advancing an understanding of the mechanisms that cause pain in patients with malignant disease.

METHODS
A murine model of bone cancer was studied. Combined analysis of the extent of tumor-induced bone destruction, pain, and neurochemical characterization of the peripheral and central nervous systems was performed to investigate bone cancer pain. Disease-induced bone destruction was assessed by radiographs and histomorphometry. Pain was assessed by spontaneous and elicited behaviors, and neurochemical analysis involved immunohistochemical detection of hyperalgesic peptides and neurochemical markers.

RESULTS
Mice with distal femoral sarcomas exhibited behavioral and neurochemical measures of pain. The pain condition created by malignant bone disease was distinct neurochemically from inflammatory and neuropathic pain states. Experimental evidence indicated that both disease-induced osteolysis and tumors themselves contributed to the generation of pain and that peripheral and central sensitization of the nervous system was present.

CONCLUSIONS
Malignant bone disease creates a unique pain state that involves sensitization of the nervous system. Major contributors to the pain state within the bone tissue are osteoclastic bone resorption and the malignant disease itself. Cancer 2003;97(3 Suppl):866–73. © 2003 American Cancer Society.

DOI 10.1002/cncr.11144

The disease-related event that has the most significant impact on quality of life for patients with malignant disease is cancer-induced pain. Bone cancer pain is the most common source of pain in patients with malignant disease.1-4 It affects patients with bone sarcomas and patients with malignant tumors that have spread to bone. Breast carcinoma and prostate carcinoma are the most common cause of pain from malignant bone disease.5 This fact underscores the prevalence of these two types of carcinoma and their affinity for metastasizing to bone. In fact, 70% of patients with advanced breast or prostate carcinoma have skeletal metastases, and skeletal metastases are present in > 90% of patients who die from breast or prostate carcinoma.5 At its onset, bone cancer pain can be intermittent, but it progresses rapidly into continuous pain that is exacerbated by episodes of breakthrough pain. Once this chronic pain is established, the circumstance further deteriorates when mechanical allodynia develops. Mechanical allodynia occurs when normally nonpainful activity or stimulation is perceived as painful. For example, coughing, turning in bed, or gentle limb movements can cause intense pain.

Treatment of Bone Cancer Pain
Despite the availability of a variety of therapies for treating bone cancer pain, permanent pain relief often is not achieved.3, 4 Current treatments focus on eradicating bone tumors, decreasing the impact of tumor-induced bone loss, surgical stabilization of painful bones, or administration of strong pain medications. Treatments that focus on eradicating tumors are chemotherapy and radiation. Of these two treatments, external beam radiation is most effective at relieving pain, with 90% of patients receiving some pain relief and 50% of patients experiencing a period of complete pain relief. Unfortunately, > 50% of patients who receive some pain relief will have their pain return to pretreatment levels.6 The mechanism through which radiation decreases bone cancer pain is unknown, but it is suspected that the mechanism is related to decreased tumor burden.

Treatments that focus on decreasing potentially painful cancer-induced bone loss include administration of bisphosphonates and/or surgical stabilization of affected bones. After treatment with bisphosphonates, up to 50% of patients report some relief of bone pain.7, 8 The mechanism through which bisphosphonates decrease bone cancer pain is unknown, but it is suspected that the mechanism is related to the inhibition of disease-induced, osteoclast-mediated bone loss.9-12 Interpretation of pain-relief data from clinical trials using bisphosphonates should be performed with caution, however, because most of these patients are receiving concurrent antineoplastic therapy as well as radiation therapy.10, 11, 13, 14

Surgical stabilization of bones with painful skeletal metastasis can be employed to manage pain that has not responded to other treatment modalities or, in extreme cases, to prevent skeletal fracture.15 Although it is suspected that such treatments relieve pain, this has been reported only in retrospective clinical studies with uncertain inclusion criteria and follow-up. A recent pilot study that reported the first prospective, consecutive series of surgical treatment of painful skeletal metastases demonstrated that surgical treatment did not provide a clear benefit to quality of life for patients with advanced skeletal metastases.16

The final means for managing bone cancer pain is through medication. Patients with malignant disease who have bone pain despite chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and/or bisphosphonate therapy receive various combinations of antiinflammatory agents, narcotics, and other central nervous system-targeted pharmaceuticals.17 Bone cancer pain often responds well to opioids, although the doses required to decrease the pain tend to be high (120 mg per day).18 However, even among patients in whom opiates can control the chronic pain, 63% of patients describe one or more daily episode(s) of breakthrough pain. One difficulty with this breakthrough pain is that systemic opioid doses required to control this intermittent pain produce diverse and disabling side effects that may diminish quality of life. Opioid management of such pain is not directed at the cause of the pain; consequently, numerous organs are impacted by these treatments. Treatments can have diverse and disabling side effects, including confusion; somnolence; agitation; constipation; poor quality of life; and, in many patients, persistent pain.1

Developing new treatments for patients with bone cancer pain will depend on the identification of an experimental animal model that parallels the human condition and then will depend on providing new knowledge defining the cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for the generation and maintenance of this pain. Recently, much progress has been made in this regard, and both the development of an experimental animal model of bone cancer pain and mechanistic insights from study of the model have provided exciting direction for designing new therapies.

Obstacles to Improving Treatment
Advances in the treatment of patients with bone cancer pain is needed desperately but is dependent on improving our understanding of the mechanisms that generate and maintain this debilitating pain. Until recently, there has not been an experimental model for studying bone cancer pain; thus, very little is known about its etiology. For instance, it is not known whether the disease itself can cause pain, and it is not known whether the influence of cancer on components of the bone microenvironment causes pain. Candidate tissues include mineralized bone, primary afferent neurons, and tumor-associated inflammatory cells.

The two primary obstacles to improving our understanding of the mechanisms that cause bone cancer pain have been the absence of an experimental animal model and the absence of knowledge regarding the neurobiologic characteristics of bone cancer pain. That is, does bone cancer pain differ from the well-characterized painful conditions of inflammation and neuropathy? Recent work has overcome these obstacles and has provided a foundation on which the opportunity for significant future discovery rests.

Bone Cancer Pain: An Experimental Model
An established model of distal femoral osteolytic sarcomas was used to determine whether the model was appropriate for studying the clinical problem of bone cancer pain.19 The objective of the overall design of the bone cancer pain model was to correlate behavioral and neurochemical measures of pain with one another and with the extent of disease-induced bone destruction. Extent of bone destruction was assessed by using a radiographic scoring system (Fig. 1).20 Painful behaviors were assessed by both elicited behaviors and observation of spontaneous movement,21-23 and neurochemical markers of pain were evaluated by immunohistochemical measures of neurotrophins and phenotypic neuronal markers in bone, dorsal root ganglia (DRGs), and spinal cords.20-25 
Bone destruction scoring system for tumor-induced osteolysis after intrafemoral injection of tumor cells. (A) Normal bone marrow and intact bone in control femora. (B) Tumor-bearing femora show replacement of bone marrow with tumor cells and osteolysis (arrowhead). (C) Radiographs illustrate the bone destruction scoring system by showing control bone (0, no loss) and progressive bone loss in tumor-bearing bones (1–3). Progressive bone loss was evaluated as follows: 1) intramedullary osteolysis without full-thickness cortical osteolysis, 2) intramedullary osteolysis and full-thickness cortical erosion through one cortex, and 3) intramedullary osteolysis and full-thickness cortical erosion through both cortices. Arrowheads indicate regions of osteolysis. Reprinted with permission from Schwei MJ, Honore P, Rogers SD, et al. Neurochemical and cellular reorganization of the spinal cord in a murine model of bone cancer pain. J Neurosci. 1999;19:10886–10897. © 1999 Society for Neuroscience.

Analysis of extent of tumor, behavioral measures of pain, and neurochemical measures of pain indicated that the distal femoral sarcoma model caused severe and progressive pain. Behavioral measures of activity-induced guarding, limb use while ambulating, spontaneous flinches, and allodynia revealed intense pain: levels of pain that were correlated with the extent of disease-induced osteolysis.20, 21

Evaluation of spinal cords included determining neuronal composition, overall level of spinal cord neuronal activity, and composition of glial cells. Malignant bone disease induced three significant and specific neurochemical alterations in the spinal cord. These were expression of the prohyperalgesic peptide dynorphin, increased neuronal activity (c-Fos), and massive astrocytosis (glial fibrillary acidic protein [GFAP]) (Fig. 2).20-23 With each of these three neurochemical changes, alterations were observed only in lumbar nerve segments ipsilateral to and innervating the tumor-bearing hind limb. These neurochemical findings were correlated with bone destruction scores, and no pain was observed when the malignancy was grown in soft tissues (e.g., quadriceps muscle). 
Unilateral increase of astrocytes in the fourth lumbar segment of the spinal cord after intrafemoral injection of Tumor 2472. A significant increase in glial fibrillary acidic protein staining (bright orange) is seen on the side of the spinal cord ipsilateral to the osteolytic tumor. Reprinted with permission from Schwei MJ, Honore P, Rogers SD, et al. Neurochemical and cellular reorganization of the spinal cord in a murine model of bone cancer pain. J Neurosci. 1999;19:10886–10897. © 1999 Society for Neuroscience.

To determine whether animals with distal femoral malignancies had pain after nonnoxious stimulation (allodynia), painful behaviors and substance P receptor internalization in lamina I were measured after gentle limb palpation. Nonnoxious palpation elicited painful behaviors and intense internalization of substance P receptors (Fig. 3). Again, the findings were correlated with the extent of bone destruction.20, 21 In summary, findings that combined and correlated the extent of bone destruction, painful behaviors, and neurochemical measures of pain characterized the distal femoral sarcoma model as a valid experimental model of bone cancer pain.
Nonnoxious stimulation induces substance P receptor (SPR) internalization in the spinal cord after intrafemoral injection of Tumor 2472. Twenty-one days after intraosseous tumor cell injection, animals were subjected to 2-minute light palpation of the tumor-bearing limb or the sham limb. (A) Nocifensive behavior score. The asterisk indicates P < 0.001 compared with the contralateral side. Bright intracellular signal indicates internalized substance P-SPR complexes in lamina I neurons from tumor-injected femora (C) but not from sham-injected femora (B). Reprinted with permission from Schwei MJ, Honore P, Rogers SD, et al. Neurochemical and cellular reorganization of the spinal cord in a murine model of bone cancer pain. J Neurosci. 1999;19:10886–10897. © 1999 Society for Neuroscience.
Bone Cancer Pain: A Unique Pain State
It has been shown that different neurochemical changes occur in primary afferent neurons and in the spinal cord in different persistent pain states. The two widely recognized, neurochemically distinct pain states are inflammatory pain and neuropathic pain. These distinct conditions provide some basis for understanding why some analgesics are efficacious against specific types of pain.26, 27 For example, whereas morphine is quite efficacious in treating inflammatory pain, it is not particularly effective in treating neuropathic pain. In contrast, gabapentin frequently is efficacious in treating neuropathic pain but is not as effective for treating inflammatory pain.28-35 Neurochemical measures of pain have been compared between mice with inflammatory pain, neuropathic pain, and bone cancer pain; the findings indicated that bone cancer pain results in a unique neurochemical pain state: a condition that differs clearly from inflammatory pain or neuropathic pain.22

Distinct neurochemical features occur in inflammatory, neuropathic, and bone cancer pain states. In the persistent inflammatory pain state induced by subcutaneous injection of complete Freund adjuvant, there is an up-regulation of substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), whereas there is a down-regulation of these same primary afferent neurotransmitters in neuropathy secondary to nerve transection or ligation.36-43 Remarkably, there is no significant change in the expression of these neurotransmitters in the murine bone cancer model.22 Galanin and neuropeptide Y are up-regulated dramatically in the neuropathic pain model but are down-regulated in primary afferent neurons of the inflammatory bone cancer pain states.

The differences in neurochemical features that occur with each pain state in the spinal cord are dramatic. Inflammation induces an increase in substance P and CGRP in laminae I–II, neuropathy induces a down-regulation of these markers, and bone cancer had no effect.22 Finally, bone cancer pain induced a dramatic up-regulation of GFAP in the spinal cord, indicating massive astrogliosis, a circumstance that was not seen with either inflammatory pain or neuropathic pain.

In summary, the data argue that bone cancer pain is not merely a form of pain due to inflammatory or neuropathic conditions but, rather, is a distinct pain entity. This realization is important and exciting. The uniqueness of bone cancer pain provides hope for future discoveries of novel, bone cancer pain specific therapies and underscores the value of identifying the unique mechanisms through which malignant bone disease causes pain.

Mechanisms of Bone Cancer Pain
Mechanisms through which malignant bone disease induces pain are largely unknown, although it is suspected that they are secondary to the presence of tumor in bone or to the effect of disease on the skeleton. Recently, as discussed above, the effect of malignant bone disease on the peripheral and central nervous systems has been studied.

Osteolysis Causes Pain
Clinical data suggest, and new experimental data verify, that cancer-induced osteolysis contributes to bone cancer pain. Data from clinical trials with bisphosphonates and clinical analysis of bone metabolism in patients with skeletal metastasis suggest that cancer-induced bone resorption is linked to bone cancer pain.8-13, 44 These clinical investigations, however, have not identified a direct cause-and-effect relation between cancer-induced bone loss and pain.

Histologic analysis of osteolytic tumors in experimental models consistently have demonstrated that osteoclasts, the body's principal bone-resorbing cells, are stimulated by osteolytic tumors and are responsible for cancer-induced osteolysis.45-48 Specific analysis of the painful sarcomas described above has characterized several mechanistic features of cancer-induced, osteoclast-mediated osteolysis. It has been shown that osteoclasts are required for tumor osteolysis, osteoclast numbers increase secondary to accelerated osteoclast formation, tumors induce an increase in expression of the receptor activator for nuclear factor κB in bone, and osteoprotegerin (OPG) blocks the cancer-induced osteolysis.19, 49, 50 Knowing that the extent of bone destruction was correlated in the experimental pain model with each behavioral and neurochemical measure of pain, and realizing that OPG treatment blocked cancer-induced osteolysis, it was possible to determine whether disease-induced bone loss contributed to bone cancer pain.

The elimination of bone resorption at sites of bone cancer significantly diminished but did not eliminate bone cancer pain. Mice that had received distal femoral intraosseous injections were treated with the osteoclast-inhibiting agent OPG before osteolysis occurred and before they exhibited painful behaviors. OPG treatment completely blocked osteolysis and reduced but did not eliminate skeletal pain and pain-related neurochemical changes in the spinal cord.21 Behavioral measures of chronic pain and allodynia improved. Neurochemical alterations in the spinal cord that were reduced to basal levels during OPG treatment were dynorphin levels and GFAP detection. In contrast, c-Fos levels and substance P receptor internalization were decreased in OPG-treated animals but did not return to basal levels (Table 1). Additional investigation has been performed in which mice with painful osteolytic malignancies were treated with OPG to determine whether osteoclastic bone resorption contributed to advanced bone cancer pain. The treatment of these animals halted progression of bone destruction and stabilized but did not improve behavioral or neurochemical measures of pain.23 Bone Cancer Sensitizes the Nervous System
Pain signaling from peripheral tissues is initiated by tissue stimulation of primary afferent sensory fibers. These neurons house their nuclei and cell bodies in DRGs, and they terminate in the central nervous system by innervating lamina I spinal cord neurons. It important to note that bone has rich sensory and sympathetic fiber innervation involving mineralized bone and periosteum.51, 52 Periosteum, the connective tissue sheath that covers the external surface of bone, receives dense sensory and sympathetic innervation, whereas nerve fibers in the mineralized portion of bone are concentrated less and are associated with blood vessels within Haversian canals.53-56

Under conditions of inflammation or neuropathy, the nervous system undergoes a process called sensitization. Sensitization of primary afferent sensory neurons (nociceptors) plays a significant role in developing hyperalgesia and allodynia.57-59 Sensitization involves changes in neurons that alter their response to stimulation. After sensitization, mildly noxious stimuli are perceived as highly noxious (hyperalgesia), and painless stimuli are perceived as noxious (allodynia). Hyperalgesia and allodynia are due in part to a series of biochemical events that occur in sensory neurons (peripheral sensitization) and spinal cord neurons (central sensitization).60 New findings indicate that peripheral sensitization occurs during bone cancer pain; specifically, painless stimulation (gentle touching) elicits profound release of substance P from nociceptors, terminating in lamina I, a phenomenon that occurs only during a state of peripheral sensitization.20-22, 25, 26, 61

Sensitization within the central nervous system, particularly in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, plays a significant role in developing hyperalgesia and allodynia.62-64 It has been shown that central sensitization develops in animal models of inflammatory and neuropathic pain. New findings indicate that central sensitization occurs during bone cancer pain. Specifically, the presence of malignant bone disease induces the following alterations in the spinal cord: profound astrocytosis, increased expression of c-Fos (a general marker of neuronal activity), and appearance of the prohyperalgesic peptide dynorphin.20, 21 Taken together, these findings indicate that malignant bone disease leads to reorganization and sensitization of the spinal cord.

Conclusions
Major advances in the prevention and treatment of bone cancer pain will require new insights into the mechanisms that initiate and maintain this debilitating pain state. Recent work provides significant opportunity for advancing mechanistic knowledge of this condition. It is now known that, at the level of peripheral tissue, both disease-induced bone loss and the presence of tumor contribute to the painful state. It is now known that bone malignancies induce peripheral and central sensitization of the nervous system. Future investigation defining the molecular means through which this sensitization occurs will be essential to improve therapy for patients with bone cancer pain and may provide direction in managing patients with inflammatory and neuropathic pain states.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank M. Ramnaraine, P. Honore, M. Sabino, D. Mach, and N. Luger for suggestions and invaluable efforts. 
Primary bone cancers are extremely rare neoplasms accounting for fewer than 0.2% of all cancers, although the true incidence is difficult to determine because of the rarity of these tumors.1,2 In 2013, an estimated 3010 new cases will be diagnosed in the United States and 1440 people will die of the disease.3 Primary bone cancers demonstrate wide clinical heterogeneity and are often curable with proper treatment. Osteosarcoma (35%), chondrosarcoma (30%), and Ewing sarcoma (16%) are the most common forms of bone cancer. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma, fibrosarcoma, chordoma, and giant cell tumor of the bone (GCTB) are rare tumors, constituting up to 1% to 5% of all primary malignant bone tumors.4 GCTB has both benign and malignant forms, with the benign form the most common subtype.

Various types of bone cancers are named based on their histologic origin: chondrosarcomas arise from cartilage, osteosarcomas arise from bone, and fibrogenic tissue is the origin of fibrosarcoma of bone, whereas vascular tissue gives rise to hemangioendothelioma and hemangiopericytoma. Notochordal tissue gives rise to chordoma. Several primary bone cancers, including Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT), are of unknown histologic origin. Chondrosarcoma is usually found in middle-aged and older adults. Osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma develop mainly in children and young adults. Chordoma is more common in men, with peak incidence in the fifth to sixth decades of life.5,6

The pathogenesis and origin of most bone cancers remains unclear. Gene rearrangements between the EWS and ETS family of genes have been implicated in the pathogenesis of ESFT.7-10 Specific germ-line mutations have also been implicated in the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma.11,12 The Li-Fraumeni syndrome characterized by a germ-line mutation in the TP53 gene is associated with a high risk of developing osteosarcoma.13-15 Osteosarcoma is the most common second primary malignancy in patients with a history of retinoblastoma, characterized by a mutation in the retinoblastoma gene RB1.11,16,17 Increased incidences of osteosarcoma have also been associated with other inherited genetic predisposition syndromes characterized by mutations in the DNA helicase genes.11,12 Osteosarcoma 
is also the most common radiation-induced bone sarcoma.18,19
The development of multiagent chemotherapy regimens for neoadjuvant and adjuvant treatment has considerably improved the prognosis for patients with osteosarcoma and ESFT.20,21 With current multimodality treatment, approximately three-quarters of all patients diagnosed with osteosarcoma are cured and 90% to 95% of adult patients diagnosed with osteosarcoma can be successfully treated with limb-sparing approaches rather than amputation.22 Survival rates have improved to almost 70% in patients with localized ESFT.21 A cure is still achievable in selected patients diagnosed with metastatic ESFT and osteosarcoma at presentation.23,24

These guidelines focus on chordoma, chondrosarcoma, ESFT, GCTB, and osteosarcoma. This manuscript highlights only a portion of the NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines) for Bone Cancer. Please refer to NCCN.org for the complete version of these guidelines.

Staging
The 2010 AJCC staging classification is shown in Table 1 (available online, in these guidelines, at NCCN. org [ST-1]). This system is based on the assessment of histologic grade (G), tumor size (T), and presence of regional (N) and/or distant metastases (M). The Surgical Staging System (SSS) is another staging system for bone and soft tissue sarcomas developed by the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (Table 2, available at NCCN.org [ST-1]).25 (available at NCCN.org [ST-1]).25 This system stratifies both bone and soft tissue sarcomas by the assessment of the surgical grade (G), local extent (T), and presence or absence of regional or distant metastases. It may be used in addition to the AJCC staging system.

Principles of Bone Cancer Management
Multidisciplinary Team Involvement
Primary bone tumors and selected metastatic tumors should be evaluated and treated by a multidisciplinary team of physicians with demonstrated expertise in the management of these tumors. Long-term surveillance and follow-up are necessary when considering the risk of recurrence and comorbidities associated with chemotherapy and radiation therapy (RT). Life-long follow-up is recommended for surveillance and treatment of late effects of surgery, RT, and chemotherapy in long-term survivors. Patients should be given a survivorship prescription to schedule follow-up with a multidisciplinary team. Fertility issues should be discussed with appropriate patients before initiation of treatment.26

Diagnostic Workup
Suspicion of a malignant bone tumor in a patient with a painful lesion often begins when a poorly marginated lesion is seen on a plain radiograph. In patients younger than 40 years, an aggressive, painful bone lesion has a significant risk of being a malignant primary bone tumor, and referral to an orthopedic oncologist should be considered before further workup. In patients 40 years of age and older, CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis; bone scan; mammogram; and other imaging studies as clinically indicated should be performed if plain radiographs do not suggest a specific diagnosis.27

All patients with suspected bone sarcoma should undergo complete staging before biopsy. The standard staging workup for a suspected primary bone cancer should include chest imaging (chest radiograph or chest CT to detect pulmonary metastases), appropriate imaging of the primary site (plain radiographs, MRI for local staging, and/or CT scan), and bone scan.28 Whole-body MRI is a sensitive imaging technique for detecting skeletal metastases in patients with small cell neoplasms, ESFT, and osteosarcoma.29,30 Imaging of painless bone lesions should be evaluated by a musculoskeletal radiologist followed by appropriate referral to a multidisciplinary treatment team if necessary. Laboratory studies, such as CBC, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP), should be performed before initiation of treatment.

PET or PET/CT is an alternative imaging technique that has been used in the pretreatment staging of soft tissue and bone sarcomas.31,32 Recent reports in the literature have shown the utility of PET scans in the evaluation of response to chemotherapy in patients with osteosarcoma, ESFT, and advanced chordoma.33-36 PET or PET/CT with the investigational radioactive substance 18F-fluoromisonidazole (FMISO) has been shown to identify the hypoxic component in residual chordomas before RT.37 This approach is being evaluated in clinical trials and would be helpful in identifying tumors with low oxygen levels that are more resistant to RT.

Biopsy
Incisional (open) and percutaneous biopsy (core needle or fine-needle aspiration) are the techniques used historically in the diagnosis of musculoskeletal lesions.38,39 Open biopsy is the most accurate method because of the larger sample size, which is useful for performing additional studies such as immunohistochemistry or cytogenetics.40 However, open biopsy requires general or regional anesthesia and an operating room, whereas core biopsy can be performed under local anesthesia, with or without sedation. Core needle biopsy has also been used as an alternative to open biopsy for diagnosing musculoskeletal lesions, with accuracy rates ranging from 88% to 96% when adequate samples are obtained.41-44 Cost savings may be realized when needle biopsy is used in selected patients.41 Recent advances in imaging techniques have contributed to the increasing use of image-guided percutaneous biopsy for the diagnosis of primary and secondary bone tumors.45 The preferred method for biopsy remains controversial because no randomized controlled trials have compared core needle biopsy with open biopsy.

The guidelines recommend core needle or open biopsy to confirm the diagnosis of primary bone tumor before any surgical procedure or fixation of primary site. Biopsy should be performed at the center that will provide definitive treatment for patients with a suspected primary malignant bone tumor. At biopsy, careful consideration should be given to appropriate stabilization of the bone and/or to measures to protect against impending pathologic fracture. The placement of biopsy is critical to the planning of limb-sparing surgery, and failure to follow appropriate biopsy procedures may lead to adverse patient outcomes.38,39 In a multicenter review of 597 patients with musculoskeletal tumors, alteration of the treatment plan (complex resection or the use of adjunctive treatment) was encountered in 19%, and unnecessary amputation was performed in 18 patients.46

Both open and core needle biopsy techniques are associated with risk of local tumor recurrence, either through spillage of tumor or tumor seeding along the biopsy tract if the scar is not removed en bloc during tumor resection. The risk of tumor seeding is less with core needle biopsy.47,48 Nevertheless, the same principles should be applied for core needle and open biopsy. Appropriate communication between the surgeon, musculoskeletal oncologist, and bone pathologist is critical in planning the biopsy route. It is essential to select the biopsy route in collaboration with the surgeon to ensure that the biopsy tract lies within the planned resection bed so that it can be resected with the same wide margins as the primary tumor during surgery. Although fine-needle aspiration is not associated with a significant risk of tumor seeding, it is not suitable for the diagnosis of primary lesions, because its diagnostic accuracy is less than that of core needle biopsy.49

Surgery
Surgical margins should be negative, wide enough to minimize potential local recurrence, and narrow enough to maximize function. Wide excision implies histologically negative surgical margins, and is necessary to optimize local control. Local tumor control may be achieved either through limb-sparing resection or limb amputation. In selected cases, amputation may be the most appropriate option to achieve this goal. However, limb-sparing resection is preferred if reasonable functional outcomes can be achieved. Final pathologic evaluation should include assessment of surgical margins and size/dimensions of tumor. The response to the preoperative regimen should be evaluated using pathologic mapping. Consultation with a physiatrist is recommended to evaluate for mobility training and to prescribe an appropriate rehabilitation program.

Radiation Therapy
RT is used either as an adjuvant to surgery for patients with resectable tumors or as definitive therapy in patients with tumors not amenable to surgery. Specialized techniques such as intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT); particle beam RT with protons, carbon ions, or other heavy ions; stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS); or fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy (FSRT) should be considered as clinically indicated to deliver high radiation doses while maximizing normal tissue-sparing. RT should be administered at the same specialized center that is providing surgical and systemic interventions. See “Principles of Radiation Therapy” in the full version of these guidelines for treatment volumes and radiation doses specific to each subtype (to view the most recent version of these guidelines, visit NCCN.org).

Chordoma
Chordomas arise from the embryonic remnants of the notochord and are more common in older adults. Chordomas predominantly arise in the axial skeleton, with the sacrum (50%-60%), skull base (25%-35%), and spine (15%) the most common primary sites.6,50 Chordomas are classified into 3 histologic variants: conventional, chondroid, and dedifferentiated. Conventional chordomas are the most common histologic subtype, characterized by the absence of cartilaginous or mesenchymal components. Chondroid chordomas present with histologic features of chordoma and cartilage elements, accounting for 5% to 15% of all chordomas. Dedifferentiated chordomas constitute approximately 2% to 8% of all chordomas and have features of high-grade spindle cell sarcoma and an aggressive clinical course.50

Chordomas of the spine and sacrum present with localized deep pain or radiculopathies, whereas cervical chordomas can cause airway obstruction or dysphagia and might present as an oropharyngeal mass. Neurologic deficit is more often associated with chordomas of the skull base and mobile spine than with chordomas of the sacrococcygeal region.6

Workup
Initial workup should include a history and physical examination with adequate imaging (radiograph, CT, and MRI) of the primary site, screening MRI of spinal axis, and CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. PET scan or bone scan (if PET scan is negative) can be considered for unusual cases. Benign notochordal cell tumors (BNCTs) are considered precursors to chordomas and do not require surgical management.51,52 CT scan and MRI may be useful in distinguishing BNCTs from chordomas.53,54

For skull base chordomas, CT is useful to delineate bone destruction and the presence of calcifications, whereas MRI is the preferred modality for defining the tumor margin from brain, characterizing the position and extension of tumors into the adjacent soft tissue structures, and visualizing blood vessels.55,56 For sacrococcygeal chordomas, CT and MRI are useful for assessing soft tissue involvement, calcifications, and epidural extension.57-59 MRI provides more precise and superior contrast with surrounding soft tissues compared with CT, and is helpful to assess recurrent or metastatic lesions.57,58 CT is also of particular importance to assess bony involvement, calcifications, and soft tissue and epidural extension of spinal chordomas, whereas MRI is the best imaging modality to detect tumor extension, cord compression, local recurrence, and residual tumor in the surgical scar tissue after surgical resection.60,61 CT scan is also useful in planning the reconstruction of the resistant osseous defect in tumors of the proximal sacrum.

Biopsy to confirm histologic subtype should be performed after imaging studies and may vary depending on the anatomic location of the tumor. Needle biopsy is not recommended for skull base tumors. Suspected sacral chordomas should be biopsied dorsally rather than transrectally.

Treatment
Surgery: Wide excision with adequate margins is the preferred primary treatment for patients with chordoma.62,63 A recent retrospective analysis of 962 patients with chordoma identified in the SEER database demonstrated that surgery significantly improves the overall survival (OS).63 Several other reports have confirmed the prognostic significance of wide surgical margins, in terms of relapse-free survival and OS, in patients with chordomas of the sacrum,64-66 skull base67-71 and spine.66,72

Among patients with chordoma of the mobile spine, Boriani et al72 reported that only margin-free en bloc resection was associated with continuous disease-free survival (DFS) with a follow-up of longer than 5 years; 12 of 18 patients were continuously disease-free at an average of 8 years after en bloc resection, whereas all patients who were treated with intralesional excision experienced recurrences in less than 2 years. In patients with chordomas of the sacrum and spine, Ruggieri et al65 reported a local recurrence rate of only 17% after wide surgical margins compared with 81% after intralesional excision or marginal surgery. Tzortzidis et al68 reported that aggressive microsurgical resection is associated with long-term, tumor-free survival with good functional outcome in patients with cranial base chordomas; gross total removal was achieved in 72% of patients, resulting in local control rates of 50%. In a recent 10-year meta-analysis that included 802 patients with skull base chordomas, Di Maio et al71 reported that those with incomplete resection were 3.83 times more likely to experience a recurrence at 5 years than those with complete resection.

Radiation Therapy: RT (preoperative, postoperative, or intraoperative) is used in combination with surgery to improve local control and DFS for patients with resectable sacral and skull base chordomas.67,73-78 In a retrospective series involving 24 patients with sacral and spine chordomas, combination of short-course preoperative RT, resection, and reduced-field high-dose postoperative RT resulted in 5-year DFS and local control rates of 54% and 72%, respectively.75 In a more recent retrospective series of 15 patients with sacrococcygeal chordoma who underwent surgical treatment, intralesional resection with postoperative RT was associated with lower local recurrence rates (20%) than extralesional resection without RT (100%, with a mean time to recurrence of 2 years); the time to recurrence was also significantly longer in patients who received RT after surgery.77 RT in combination with surgery is also associated with improved local recurrence rates in patients with conventional or chondroid chordomas of the skull base.74,76

Particle beam RT (either alone or in combination with photon beam RT) with high-energy protons79-87 or carbon ions88-92 has resulted in local control rates ranging from 62% to 81% in patients with skull base and extracranial chordomas involving the spine and sacrum. In patients with sacral chordomas tumors treated with a combination of high-energy proton and photon beam RT, local control rates were higher in patients with primary tumors compared with those with recurrent tumors.85 Carbon ion RT also resulted in preservation of urinary and anorectal function compared with surgery in patients with sacral chordomas.92

Specialized techniques such as IMRT, SRS, and FSRT have also been associated with good local control rates in cranial and extracranial chordomas.93-97

Systemic Therapy: Chordomas are not sensitive to chemotherapy except for the potentially dedifferentiated portion of high-grade dedifferentiated chordomas.98 Several signal transduction pathways, including platelet-derived growth factor receptor, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), have been implicated in the pathogenesis of chordomas, leading to the development of targeted therapies.99,100

In a phase II trial of 56 patients with advanced chordoma treated with imatinib, 70% of patients had stable disease. The clinical benefit rate as determined based on RECIST criteria (complete response + partial response and stable disease ≥6 months) was 64%, and the median progression-free survival (PFS) in the intention-to-treat population was 9 months.36 Imatinib in combination with cisplatin or sirolimus has also been effective in small series of patients with advanced chordoma resistant to prior imatinib therapy.101,102 The efficacy of EGFR inhibitors such as gefitinib, erlotinib, and cetuximab in patients with advanced chordoma resistant to imatinib has also been demonstrated in case reports.103-105

NCCN Recommendations: Tumor location is the most important variable determining the choice of primary treatment for patients with conventional or chondroid chordomas. Dedifferentiated chordomas are usually managed as described in the NCCN Guidelines for Soft Tissue Sarcoma (to view the most recent version of these guidelines, visit NCCN.org).

Wide excision, with or without RT, is the primary treatment option for patients with resectable conventional or chondroid chordomas of the sacrum and mobile spine.62,63 Intralesional excision with or without RT (followed by MRI to assess the adequacy of resection) is the preferred treatment for patients with resectable skull base tumors of conventional or chondroid histology. Maximal safe resection is recommended when appropriate.70 Adjuvant treatment with RT can be considered for large extracompartmental tumors or for positive surgical margins after resection. Postoperative RT has been associated with improved local control and DFS after surgery with macroscopic surgical margins or intralesional excision.73,76,77,106,107 Re-resection, if necessary, can be considered for skull base tumors with positive surgical margins.

RT is the primary treatment option for patients with unresectable chordomas, irrespective of the tumor location.

Surveillance
Surveillance consists of a physical examination, imaging (radiograph, MRI with or without CT) of the surgical site as clinically indicated, chest imaging (every 6 months for 5 years and annually thereafter), and annual cross-sectional abdominal imaging.

Relapsed Disease
Chordomas are characterized by a high rate of local recurrence, and distant metastases to lungs, bone, soft tissue, lymph nodes, liver, and skin have been reported in up to 40% of patients with local recurrence.64,79,108,109 Among patients with recurrent chordomas of skull base and spine, Fagundes et al79 reported a higher 2-year actuarial OS rate for patients treated with subtotal resection than those who received supportive care only (63% and 21%, respectively; P=.001). However, some studies have reported that surgery and RT are associated with lower local control rates for recurrent tumors compared with primary tumors in patients with sacral chordomas.85,95

Patients with recurrent disease can be managed with surgery and/or RT and/or systemic therapy. The guidelines have included imatinib with or without cisplatin or sirolimus and erlotinib with or without cetuximab as systemic therapy options for patients with recurrent tumors.

Giant Cell Tumor of the Bone
GCTB is a rare benign primary tumor of the bone, accounting for approximately 3% to 5% of all primary bone tumors, with a strong tendency for local recurrence, which may metastasize to the lungs.110,111 GCTB usually occurs between 20 and 40 years of age. The distal femur and proximal tibia are the most common primary sites. Malignant transformation to high-grade osteosarcoma has been observed in rare cases and is associated with a poor prognosis.112,113

Workup
Initial workup should include a history and physical examination with adequate imaging (radiograph, CT, and MRI) of the primary site. CT is useful to define the extent of cortical destruction, whereas MRI is the preferred imaging modality to assess the extension of tumors into the adjacent soft tissue and neurovascular structures.114,115 Chest imaging is essential to identify the presence of metastatic disease. Bone scan can be considered for unusual cases. Biopsy is essential to confirm the diagnosis. Brown tumor of hyperparathyroidism should be considered as a differential diagnosis, although routine evolution of serum calcium, phosphate, and parathyroid hormone levels can help exclude this diagnosis.116

Treatment
Surgery: Wide excision and intralesional curettage are the 2 surgical treatment options for patients with resectable tumors.117-123 Wide excision is associated with a lower risk of local recurrence than intralesional curettage, with the local recurrence rates ranging from 0% to 12% for wide excision and 12% to 65% for intralesional curettage. In some studies, the extent of intralesional excision and the tumor stage have been identified as prognostic indicators for risk of recurrence.124-126 Blackley et al125 reported a local recurrence rate of 12% in 59 patients who were treated with curettage with high-speed burr and bone grafting, which was similar to that observed with the use of adjuvants; most of the patients had grade II or III tumors. In another retrospective analysis of 137 patients, Prosser et al126 reported local recurrences in 19% patients after curettage as a primary treatment; the local recurrence rate was only 7% for patients with grade I and II tumors confined to the bone, compared with 29% for those with grade III tumors with extraosseous extension.

Surgical adjuvants have been used in conjunction with intralesional curettage to improve local control rates. However, the findings from studies that have evaluated intralesional curettage with and without adjuvant in the same cohort of patients with primary or recurrent GCTB are inconsistent, with some reporting decreased local recurrence rates with the use of adjuvants.121,123,127-129 Others, however, have reported no significant difference in local recurrence rates with and without adjuvants.130-132

Wide excision is also associated with poor functional outcome and more surgical complications.133-137 Therefore, intralesional curettage is considered the preferred treatment in most patients with stage I or II tumors. Wide excision is usually reserved for more aggressive stage III tumors with extraosseous extension or for otherwise unresectable tumors.126,138-141

Radiation Therapy: RT has been used either as a primary treatment or in combination with surgery to improve local control and DFS for patients with marginally resected, unresectable, progressive, or recurrent disease.142-152 In a recent retrospective analysis of 58 patients with GCTB (45 with primary tumor and 13 with recurrent tumor) treated with RT, the 5-year local control and OS rates were 85% and 94%, respectively.151 Median follow-up was 8 years. In this analysis, patient age was the only prognostic factor associated with rates of local control (96% for younger patients vs 73% for the older group), OS (100% vs 87%), and DFS (96% vs 65%). Other studies have identified tumor size greater than 4 cm, recurrent tumors, and RT doses of 40 Gy or less as negative prognostic factors for local control.147-149

Specialized techniques such as 3-dimensional conformal RT and IMRT have also been associated with good local control rates in patients with GCTB in locations that are not amenable to complete surgical resection.153,154

NCCN Recommendations Localized Disease: Intralesional excision with or without an effective adjuvant is an adequate primary treatment for resectable tumors.130-132

Serial arterial embolizations have been shown to be effective in the management of patients with giant cell tumors of the extremities, especially for tumors with large cortical defects or joint involvement, and those with large giant cell tumors of the sacrum.155-158 A few case reports have reported the efficacy of interferon and pegylated interferon in the management of GCTB.159-162 More recently, results of a phase II study of denosumab (a fully humanized monoclonal antibody against the RANK ligand) showed significant activity in patients with unresectable or recurrent GCTB, resulting in tumor response (defined as the elimination of at least 90% of giant cells or no radiologic progression of the target lesion for up to 25 weeks) in 86% (30 of 35) of evaluable patients.163,164

For patients with lesions that are resectable with unacceptable morbidity or unresectable axial lesions, the guidelines have included serial embolizations, denosumab, interferon, or pegylated interferon as primary treatment options. RT has been associated with an increased risk of malignant transformation and should be used in patients with tumors that are not amenable to embolization, denosumab, or interferons.

After primary treatment, patients with stable/improved disease can be observed. For patients with stable/improved disease with incomplete healing after primary treatment, intralesional excision is recommended if the lesion has become resectable. Patients with unresectable disease should be treated with denosumab. The guidelines recommend continuation of denosumab until disease progression in patients experiencing response.

Metastatic Disease: For patients presenting with resectable metastases, the guidelines recommend that the primary tumor be managed as described for localized disease.110,111,165,166 Intralesional excision is recommended for resectable metastatic sites. Denosumab, interferon, or pegylated interferon; observation; or RT are included as options for patients with unresectable metastases.

Surveillance
Surveillance should include a physical examination, imaging (radiograph, MRI with or without CT) of the surgical site as clinically indicated, and chest imaging every 6 months for 2 years and then annually thereafter.

Recurrent disease (local or metastatic) should be managed as per primary treatment for localized disease or metastatic disease at presentation.

Osteosarcoma
Osteosarcoma is the most common primary malignant bone tumor in children and young adults.2 The median age for all patients with osteosarcoma is 20 years. In adults older than 65 years, osteosarcoma develops as a secondary malignancy related to Paget disease of the bone.16

Osteosarcoma constitutes a family of lesions with a variety of histologic features and natural histories. Osteosarcomas are broadly classified into intramedullary, surface, and extraskeletal.167 High-grade intramedullary osteosarcoma is the classic or conventional form, constituting nearly 80% of osteosarcomas.167 It is a spindle cell tumor that produces osteoid or immature bone. The most frequent sites are the metaphyseal areas of the distal femur or proximal tibia, which are the sites of maximum growth. Low-grade intramedullary osteosarcoma constitutes fewer than 2% of all osteosarcomas, and the most common sites are similar to those of conventional osteosarcoma.168

Parosteal and periosteal osteosarcomas are juxtacortical or surface variants. Parosteal osteosarcomas are low-grade lesions accounting for up to 5% of all osteosarcomas.168 The most common site is the posterior distal femur. This variant tends to metastasize later than the conventional form. Transformation of low-grade parosteal osteosarcoma into high-grade sarcoma has been documented in 24% to 43% of cases.169,170 Periosteal osteosarcomas are intermediate-grade lesions most often involving the femur followed by the tibia.168 High-grade surface osteosarcomas are rare, accounting for 10% of all juxtacortical osteosarcomas.171,172 Pain and swelling are the most frequent early symptoms. Pain is often intermittent in the beginning and a thorough workup sometimes is delayed because symptoms may be confused with growing pains. Osteosarcoma spreads hematogenously, with the lung being the most common metastatic site.

Prognostic Factors
Tumor site and size; patient age; presence and location of metastases; histologic response to chemotherapy; type of surgery; and surgical margins are significant prognostic factors for patients with osteosarcoma of the extremities and trunk.173-178 In an analysis of 1702 patients with osteosarcoma of the trunk or extremities treated in the Cooperative Osteosarcoma Study Group (COSS) protocols, patient age at diagnosis, tumor site, and primary metastases were identified as predictors of survival.175 In patients with extremity osteosarcomas, size and location of the tumor within the limb at diagnosis also had a significant influence on outcome.175 All factors except age were significant in multivariate testing, with surgical remission and histologic response to chemotherapy emerging as the key prognostic factors. In a recent report of the combined analysis of 3 European Osteosarcoma Intergroup randomized controlled trials, Whelan et al178 reported that good histologic response to preoperative chemotherapy, distal location (other than proximal humerus/femur), and female sex were associated with improved survival.

In patients with proven primary metastatic osteosarcoma, the number of metastases at diagnosis and the completeness of surgical resection of all clinically detected tumor sites are of independent prognostic value.24 Patients with one or a few resectable pulmonary metastases have a survival rate that approaches that of patients with no metastatic disease.179,180

Elevated serum ALP and LDH levels have also been identified as prognostic indicators in patients with osteosarcoma.174,176,177 In a cohort of 1421 patients with osteosarcoma of the extremity, Bacci et al176 reported significantly higher serum LDH levels in patients with metastatic disease at presentation than in those with localized disease (36.6% vs 18.8%; P<.0001). The 5-year DFS correlated with serum LDH level (39.5% for patients with high LDH levels and 60% for those with normal values). In another retrospective analysis of 789 patients with osteosarcoma of the extremity, Bacci et al177 reported that the serum ALP level was a significant prognostic factor of event-free survival (EFS) in patients with osteosarcoma of extremity; the 5-year EFS rate was 24% for patients with a serum ALP value more than 4 times higher than the normal value, and 46% for patients with high values below this limit (P<.001). However, in multivariate analysis, these markers did not retain their prognostic significance when compared with tumor volume, age, and histologic response to chemotherapy.174,176

Workup
Osteosarcomas present both a local problem and a concern for distant metastasis. Initial workup should include imaging of the primary site (MRI, with or without CT), chest imaging, PET scan, and/or bone scan. More detailed imaging (CT or MRI) of abnormalities identified on primary imaging is required for suspected metastatic disease.

Plain radiographs of osteosarcomas show cortical destruction and irregular reactive bone formation. Bone scan, although uniformly abnormal at the lesion, may be useful to identify additional synchronous lesions. MRI provides excellent soft tissue contrast and may be essential for operative planning. MRI is the best imaging modality to define the extent of the lesion within the bone and soft tissues, detect “skip” metastases, and evaluate anatomic relationships with the surrounding structures. In addition, ALP and LDH are frequently elevated in patients with osteosarcoma. Serum LDH was significantly higher in patients with metastatic disease at presentation than in patients with localized disease.176

Treatment
Surgery: Surgery (limb-sparing surgery or amputation) remains an essential part of management of patients with osteosarcoma.181 Studies that have compared limb-sparing surgery and amputation in patients with high-grade nonmetastatic osteosarcoma have not shown any significant difference in survival and local recurrence rates.182-184 However, limb-sparing surgery is associated with better functional outcomes.185 In patients with high-grade osteosarcomas with good histologic response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy, limb-sparing surgery is considered the preferred surgical modality if wide surgical margins could be achieved.182,186 Amputation is generally reserved for patients with tumors in unfavorable anatomic locations not amenable to limb-sparing surgery with adequate surgical margins.181,186

Chemotherapy: The addition of adjuvant and neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimens to surgery has improved outcomes in patients with localized osteosarcoma. Early trials used chemotherapy regimens including at least 3 or more of the following drugs: doxorubicin, cisplatin, bleomycin, cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide, dactinomycin, and high-dose methotrexate.187-192 Subsequent clinical trials have demonstrated that short intensive chemotherapy regimens including cisplatin and doxorubicin with or without high-methotrexate and ifosfamide produce excellent long-term results, similar to those that have been achieved with multiagent chemotherapy.193-200

In a randomized trial conducted by the European Osteosarcoma Group, the combination of doxorubicin and cisplatin was better tolerated compared with a multidrug regimen, with no difference in survival between the groups in patients with operable, nonmetastatic osteosarcoma.194 In both groups, the 3- and 5-year OS rates were 65% and 55%, respectively, and the 5-year PFS rate was 44%. In the INT-0133 study, which compared the 3-drug regimen (cisplatin, doxorubicin, and methotrexate) with the 4-drug regimen (cisplatin, doxorubicin, methotrexate, and ifosfamide) for the treatment of patients with nonmetastatic resectable osteosarcoma, no difference was seen in 6-year EFS rates (63% and 64%, respectively) and OS rates (74% and 70%, respectively) between the groups.200

Chemotherapy regimens without doxorubicin or cisplatin have also been evaluated in patients with localized osteosarcoma with the goal of minimizing long-term cardiotoxicity and ototoxicity.201,202 In a phase II study, the combination of cisplatin, ifosfamide, and epirubicin was active and reasonably well tolerated in patients with nonmetastatic osteosarcoma of the extremity.201 With a median follow-up of 64 months, the 5-year DFS and OS rates were 41.9% and 48.2%, respectively. In another randomized multicenter trial (SFOP-OS94), the combination of ifosfamide and etoposide resulted in a higher histologic response rate than the regimen containing high-dose methotrexate and doxorubicin (56% and 39%, respectively). However, the 5-year OS was similar in both arms and no significant difference was seen in 5-year EFS rates.202 Good histopathologic response (>90% necrosis) to neoadjuvant chemotherapy has been shown to be predictive of survival regardless of the type of chemotherapy administered after surgery.176,203 In an analysis of 881 patients with nonmetastatic osteosarcoma of the extremities treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and surgery at the Rizzoli Institute, Bacci et al204 showed that the 5-year DFS and OS correlated significantly with histologic response to chemotherapy. The 5-year DFS and OS rates in good and poor responders were 67.9% versus 51.3% (P<.0001) and 78.4% versus 63.7% (P<.0001), respectively. A report from the Children's Oncology Group also confirmed these findings; the 8-year postoperative EFS and OS rates were 81% and 87%, respectively, in good responders.203 The corresponding survival rates were 46% and 52%, respectively, in poor responders.

The addition of muramyl tripeptide phosphatidyl-ethanolamine (MTP-PE) to chemotherapy has also been evaluated in patients with osteosarcoma.200,205 The addition of MTP-PE to chemotherapy was associated with a statistically significant improvement in 6-year OS (from 70% to 78%) and a trend toward better EFS in patients with nonmetastatic resectable osteosarcoma.200 However, the improvement was not statistically different in patients with metastatic disease.205 MTP-PE is not approved by the FDA for the treatment of patients with osteosarcoma.

Localized Disease
The guidelines recommend wide excision as the primary treatment for patients with low-grade (intramedullary and surface) osteosarcomas and periosteal lesions. Chemotherapy before wide excision could be considered for patients with periosteal lesions. Although chemotherapy (neoadjuvant or adjuvant) has been used in the treatment of patients with periosteal osteosarcoma, no data support that the addition of chemotherapy to wide excision improves outcome in patients with periosteal osteosarcoma.206,207 In a review of 119 patients with periosteal sarcoma published by the European Musculoskeletal Oncology Society, the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy was not a prognostic factor, although it was used in most of the patients.207 More recently, Cesari et al206 also reported similar findings; the 10-year OS rate was 86% and 83% for patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy with surgery and those who underwent surgery alone, respectively (P=.73). After wide excision (of resectable lesions), the guidelines have included postoperative chemotherapy with a category 2B recommendation for patients with low-grade (intramedullary and surface) or periosteal sarcomas with pathologic findings of high-grade disease.

Preoperative chemotherapy before wide excision is preferred for patients with high-grade osteosarcoma (category 1).193-202 Selected elderly patients may benefit from immediate surgery. After wide excision, patients with a good histologic response (amount of viable tumor <10% of the tumor area) should continue to receive several more cycles of the same chemotherapy. Patients with a poor response (viable tumor ≥10% of the tumor area) could be considered for chemotherapy with a different regimen. However, attempts to improve the outcome of poor responders through modifying the adjuvant chemotherapy remain unsuccessful.208-211 Surgical re-resection with or without RT can be considered for positive surgical margins. An ongoing randomized trial of the European and American Osteosarcoma Study Group is evaluating treatment strategies for resectable osteosarcoma based on histologic response to preoperative chemotherapy

RT or adjuvant chemotherapy is recommended if the sarcoma remains unresectable after preoperative chemotherapy. Proton beam RT has been shown to be effective for local control in some patients with unresectable or incompletely resected osteosarcoma.212

Chemotherapy should include appropriate growth factor support (see the NCCN Guidelines for Myeloid Growth Factors for growth factor support; to view the most recent version of these guidelines, visit NCCN.org). A list of specific chemotherapy regimens is available in “Bone Cancer Systemic Therapy Agents” on pages 702-703.

Metastatic Disease at Presentation
Approximately 10% to 20% of patients present with metastatic disease at diagnosis.24,213 The number of metastases at diagnosis and complete surgical resection of all clinically detected tumor sites are of independent prognostic value in patients with primary metastatic disease at presentation.24 Unilateral metastases and lower number of lung nodules were associated with improved outcomes with chemotherapy in patients with synchronous lung metastases.179,180 The 2-year DFS rate was significantly higher for patients with only 1 or 2 metastatic lesions than for those with 3 or more lesions (78% and 28%, respectively).179

Although chemotherapy is associated with improved outcomes in those with nonmetastatic high-grade localized osteosarcoma, the results were significantly poorer in those with metastatic disease at presentation.213-215 In a study of 57 patients with metastatic disease at presentation treated with cisplatin, doxorubicin, and a high dose of methotrexate and ifosfamide, the 2-year EFS and OS rates were 21% and 55%, respectively, compared with 75% and 94% in patients with nonmetastatic disease at presentation, treated with the same chemotherapy protocol.215

Among patients with primary metastases treated in cooperative osteosarcoma trials, long-term survival rates were higher for those whose metastases were excised after chemotherapy and surgery of the primary tumor compared with those whose metastases could not be removed (48% and 5%, respectively).216 The combination of aggressive chemotherapy with simultaneous resection of primary and metastatic lesions has also resulted in improved outcomes in patients with osteosarcoma of the extremity with lung metastases at presentation.217

For patients with resectable metastases (pulmonary, visceral, or skeletal) at presentation, the guidelines recommend preoperative chemotherapy followed by wide excision of the primary tumor. Chemotherapy and metastasectomy are included as options for the management of metastatic disease. Unresectable metastatic disease should be managed with chemotherapy and/or RT followed by reassessment of the primary site for local control.

Surveillance
Once treatment is completed, surveillance should occur every 3 months for 2 years, then every 4 months for year 3, every 6 months for years 4 and 5, and annually thereafter. Surveillance should include a complete physical, chest imaging, and imaging of the primary site. PET scan and/or bone scan (category 2B) may also be considered. Functional reassessment should be performed at every visit.

Relapsed or Refractory Disease
Approximately 30% of patients with localized disease and 80% of patients presenting with metastatic disease will experience relapse. The presence of solitary metastases, longer time to first relapse, and complete resectability of the disease at first recurrence have been reported to be the most important prognostic indicators for improved survival, whereas patients not amenable to surgery and those with a second or a third recurrence have a poor prognosis.218-222 In patients with primary nonmetastatic osteosarcoma, a longer relapse-free interval to pulmonary metastases was significantly associated with better survival.221 The prognostic significance of surgical clearance among patients with second and subsequent recurrences was also confirmed in a recent report of survival estimates derived from large cohorts of unselected patients treated in the COSS group trials.223

The combination of etoposide with cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide has been evaluated in clinical trials.224,225 In a phase II trial of French Society of Pediatric Oncology, ifosfamide and etoposide resulted in a response rate of 48% in patients with relapsed or refractory osteosarcoma.225 In another phase II trial, cyclophosphamide and etoposide resulted in a 19% response rate and a 35% rate of stable disease in patients with relapsed high-risk osteosarcoma.224 PFS at 4 months was 42%. Single-agent gemcitabine and combination regimens such as docetaxel and gemcitabine; cyclophosphamide and topotecan; and ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide have also been effective in the treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory bone sarcomas.226-229

Samarium-153 ethylene diamine tetramethylene phosphonate (153Sm-EDTMP), a bone seeking radiopharmaceutical, has been evaluated in patients with locally recurrent or metastatic osteosarcoma or skeletal metastases.230,231 Anderson et al230 reported that 153Sm-EDTMP with peripheral blood progenitor cell support had low nonhematologic toxicity and provided pain palliation for patients with osteosarcoma local recurrences or osteoblastic bone metastases.230 Results of a recent dose-finding study also showed that 153Sm-EDTMP can be effective in the treatment of patients with high-risk osteosarcoma.231

Targeted inhibition of a variety of molecular pathways, such as insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R), mTOR, SRC family of kinases, and vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFRs), is being evaluated in clinical trials to improve outcomes in patients with relapsed or refractory osteosarcoma. In a recent phase II trial from the Italian Sarcoma Group (n=30), sorafenib (a VEGFR inhibitor) showed activity in patients with relapsed and unresectable high-grade osteosarcoma after failure of standard multimodal therapy.232 The PFS at 4 months (primary end point) was 46%. Median PFS and OS were 4 and 7 months, respectively. The clinical benefit rate (defined as no progression at 6 months) was 29%. Partial response and stable disease were seen in 8% and 34% of patients, respectively, and were durable for 6 months or more in 17% of patients.

The safety and efficacy of high-dose chemotherapy/autologous stem cell transplantation has also been evaluated in patients with locally advanced, metastatic, or relapsed sarcoma.233,234 In the Italian Sarcoma Group study, treatment with carboplatin and etoposide followed by stem cell rescue, combined with surgery, induced complete response in chemosensitive patients.234 Transplant-related mortality was 3.1%. The 3-year OS and DFS rates were 20% and 12%, respectively. The efficacy of this approach in high-risk patients has yet to be determined in prospective randomized studies.

The optimal treatment strategy for patients with relapsed or refractory disease has not been defined. If relapse occurs, patients should undergo second-line chemotherapy and/or surgical resection. Based on the results of the recent phase II trial, the guidelines have included sorafenib as a systemic therapy option for patients with relapsed disease.232 A list of other second-line chemotherapy regimens is provided in “Bone Cancer Systemic Therapy Agents” on pages 702-703. Surveillance is recommended for patients responding to second-line therapy.

Patients experiencing disease progression or relapse after second-line therapy could be managed with resection, palliative RT, or best supportive care. The guidelines have also included 153Sm-EDTMP as an option. Participation in a clinical trial should be strongly encouraged.  
Abstract
In the United States, cancer is the second most common cause of death and it is expected that about 562,340 Americans will have died of cancer in 2009. Bone cancer pain is common in patients with advanced breast, prostate, and lung cancer as these tumors have a remarkable affinity to metastasize to bone. Once tumors metastasize to bone, they are a major cause of morbidity and mortality as the tumor induces significant skeletal remodeling, fractures, pain, and anemia. Currently, the factors that drive cancer pain are poorly understood. However, several recently introduced models of bone cancer pain, which closely mirror the human condition, are providing insight into the mechanisms that drive bone cancer pain and guide the development of mechanism-based therapies to treat the cancer pain. Several of these mechanism-based therapies have now entered human clinical trials. If successful, these therapies have the potential to significantly enlarge the repertoire of modalities that can be used to treat bone cancer pain and improve the quality of life, functional status, and survival of patients with bone cancer.

Bone cancer pain in humans
The majority of patients with metastatic bone disease experience moderate to severe pain and bone pain is one of the most common types of chronic pain in these patients.1 Although bone is not a vital organ, many common tumors (breast, prostate, thyroid, kidney, and lung) have a strong predilection to simultaneously metastasize to multiple bones.1, 2 It has been reported that tumor mestastases to the skeleton affect over 400,000 individuals in the United States annually. Tumor growth in bone results in pain, hypercalcemia, anemia, increased susceptibility to infection, skeletal fractures, compression of the spinal cord, spinal instability, and decreased mobility, all of which compromise the patient's functional status, quality of life, and survival.1, 3 Once tumor cells have metastasized to the skeleton, tumor-induced bone pain is usually described as dull in character, constant in presentation, and gradually increasing in intensity with time.3 Adherence to the World Health Organization analgesic ladder, along with adjuvant therapies such as bisphosphonates, corticosteroids, radiotherapy, and radionucleotides, can frequently control ongoing bone cancer pain. However, both opiates and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may have significant dose-limiting side effects.

As tumor growth and tumor-induced bone remodeling progress, severe “incident pain” frequently occurs.3 Incident pain is also known as “breakthrough pain” as the pain breaks through the analgesic regime that is controlling the ongoing pain. This pain is defined as an intermittent episode of extreme pain which occurs spontaneously, during non-noxious movement,4 or mechanical loading of the tumor-bearing bone(s). A major problem with incident pain in bone cancer is that it is usually more severe than ongoing pain, it appears suddenly (within seconds to minutes) and it can occur multiple times each day.4 Given the therapies that are currently available, as well as the rapid onset and severity of incident pain, this pain remains one of the most challenging of cancer pains to fully control.4 When present, incident pain can be highly debilitating to the patient's functional status and quality of life.2-4

Preclinical models of bone cancer pain
Previously, there were two commonly used in vivo mouse models to study tumor-induced bone destruction. In the first model, tumor cells are injected into the left ventricle of the heart and then spread to multiple sites including the bone marrow where they grow and induce remodeling of the surrounding bone.5, 6 While this model replicates the observation that most tumor cells metastasize to multiple sites including bone, a major problem with this model is the animal-to-animal variability in the sites, size, and extent of the metastasis. Because the tumors frequently metastasize to vital organs such as the lung or liver, the general health of the animal is also variable, making behavioral assessment of bone pain difficult. Given these problems, intracardiac injection of cancer cells as a model for bone cancer pain has proven difficult.

The second major model used to study tumor-induced bone destruction involves the direct injection of osteolytic sarcoma cells into the intramedullary space of the mouse tibia or femur (Fig. 1A). A major advance leading to the currently used model was to plug the injection hole with a dental amalgam or bone cement (Fig. 1B), which by tightly binding and sealing the injection hole, confining tumor cells to the marrow space of the bone and prevents tumor invasion into surrounding soft tissue (Fig. 1C).7 
Development of a mouse model of bone cancer pain and disease progression. Low-power anterior–posterior radiograph of a mouse femur showing the unilatereal injection of sarcoma cells into the femur (A) and confinement of the tumor cells in marrow space with an amalgam plug (B). The present model allows a simultaneous visualization and quantitative evaluation of the tumor burden by using 2472 sarcoma cancer cells genetically manipulated to express enhanced green fluorescent protein (GFP). (C) GFP-transfected tumor cells (green) injected into the ipsilateral femurs at day 6 (arrow), day 10, and day 14 postinjection. Scale bar: 6 mm in (A, B) and 1.5 mm in (C).

Mouse osteosarcoma tumor cells were the first cell type that was extensively used in this model (Fig. 1C). These cells were injected and confined to the intramedullary space of the mouse femur (Fig. 1C).8 The tumor cells grow in a highly reproducible fashion (Fig. 2E) and, as they proliferate, replace the hemapoetic cells that normally populate the bone marrow (Fig. 2D).7, 8 Eventually, the entire marrow space is filled with tumor cells and tumor-associated inflammatory/immune cells (Fig. 2E).7, 8 In terms of bone remodeling, injection of osteosarcoma cells into the femur induces a dramatic proliferation and hypertrophy of osteoclasts at the tumor–bone interface, as well as significant bone destruction in both the proximal and distal heads of the femur (Figs. 2B and E).7 In this model, ongoing and movement-evoked pain behaviors increase in severity with time and are correlated with the tumor growth and progressive tumor-induced bone destruction,7, 8 which mirrors what occurs in patients with primary or metastatic bone cancer. Although osteosarcoma cells were the first cells used in this model, other animal and human tumor cells, including prostate, breast, melanoma, colon, and lung tumors, have now been used in the closed femur model of bone cancer pain.9 
Bone remodeling and tumor growth in the 2472 sarcoma and ACE-1 prostate carcinoma-injected femurs have different characteristics depending on the osteolytic or osteoblastic component of the tumor cells as assessed by μCT imaging and hematoxilin and eosin (H&E) staining. Sham-injected femurs present relative absence of bone formation or bone destruction (A, D). The 2472 sarcoma-injected femurs display a primarily osteolytic appearance visible as regions absent of trabecular bone at the proximal and distal heads (B) as well as replacement of normal hematopoietic cells by tumor cells (E). The ACE-1 prostate carcinoma-injected femurs mainly present an osteoblastic appearance which is characterized by pathologic bone formation in the intramedullary space (C) surrounding pockets of tumor cells which generate diaphyseal bridging structures (F). (A–F) Scale bar: 0.5 mm. T, tumor; H, normal hematopoietic cells; WB, ACE-1-induced woven bone formation.

Prostate cancer is unique in that bone is often the only clinically detectable site of metastasis. Prostate tumors that have metastasized to bone frequently induce bone pain, which can be difficult to fully control as it seems to be driven simultaneously by inflammatory, neuropathic, and tumorigenic mechanisms. In an effort to develop mechanism-based therapies that attenuate bone cancer pain due to other metastatic tumors, such as those from the prostate, we recently characterized another bone cancer pain model10 (Figs. 2C and F). This model utilizes canine prostate tumor cells (ACE-1) that are injected and confined to the intramedullary space in the femur of nude mice.10 Using this model it was shown that significant tumor-induced, pain-related behaviors were first observed at 9 days following injection of prostate tumor cells and continued to increase until 19 days postinjection at which time the mice were euthanized.10 Prostate tumor cells induce significant formation of new woven bone at the proximal head, distal end, and the diaphysis of the bone (Figs. 2C and F). The marked bone formation induced by prostate cancer cells is also accompanied by bone destruction, giving the tumor-bearing femur a unique scalloped appearance when assessed by micro-computed tomography (μCT) (Fig. 2C) or with traditional histological methodology (Fig. 2F). This appearance is consistent with what is observed in human patients with prostate tumor metastases.

Tumor and osteoclast-induced acidosis and bone cancer pain
Studies in both humans and animals have suggested that osteoclasts (the cells that break down bone) play a significant role in cancer-induced bone loss11 and that osteoclasts contribute to the etiology of bone cancer pain.12, 13 Osteoclasts are terminally differentiated, multinucleated, monocyte lineage cells that resorb bone by maintaining an extracellular microenvironment of acidic pH (4.0–5.0) at the osteoclast–mineralized bone interface (Fig. 3).14 Both osteolytic (bone destroying) and osteoblastic (bone forming) cancers are characterized by osteoclast proliferation and hypertrophy.7, 15, 16 Thus, osteoclast-mediated bone remodeling results in robust production of extracellular protons,17 which are known to be potent activators of nociceptors (Fig. 3B).18 This raises the possibility that the acidic microenvironment produced by osteoclasts contributes significantly to bone cancer-associated pain through activation of acid-sensitive nociceptors that innervate the marrow, mineralized bone, and periosteum 
Schematic showing factors in bone (A) and receptors/channels expressed by nociceptors that innervate the skeleton (B) that drive bone cancer pain. A variety of cells (tumor cells and stromal cells including inflammatory/immune cells, osteoclasts, and osteoblasts) drive bone cancer pain (A). Nociceptors that innervate the bone use several different types of receptors to detect and transmit noxious stimuli that are produced by cancer cells (yellow), tumor-associated immune cells (blue), or other aspects of the tumor microenvironment. There are multiple factors that may contribute to the pain associated with cancer (B). The transient receptor potential vanilloid receptor-1 (TRPV1) and acid sensing ion channels (ASICs) detect extracellular protons produced by tumor induced tissue damage or abnormal osteoclast-mediated bone resorption. Tumor cells and associated inflammatory (immune) cells produce a variety of chemical mediators including prostaglandins (PGE2), nerve growth factor (NGF), endothelins (ET-1) and bradykinin (BK). Several of these proinflammatory mediators have receptors on peripheral terminals and can directly activate or sensitize nociceptors. It is suggested that movement-evoked breakthrough pain in cancer patients is partially due to the tumor-induced loss of the mechanical strength and stability of the tumor-bearing bone so that normally innocuous mechanical stress can now produce distortion of the putative mechanotransducers (TRPV1, TRPV4, and TRPA1) that innervate the bone.

The finding that sensory neurons can be directly excited by protons originating from cells, such as osteoclasts in bone, has generated clinical interest in targeting acid sensing channels expressed by nociceptors. Studies have shown that subsets of sensory neurons express different acid-sensing ion channels.18 Two acid-sensing ion channels expressed by nociceptors are transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) and acid-sensing ion channel-3 (ASIC-3) (Fig. 3B).18 Both of these channels are sensitized and excited by a decrease in pH in the range of 4.0–5.0, which is generated by osteoclasts (Fig. 3B).18 In addition to osteoclast-induced acidosis, the tumor stroma20 and areas of the tumor which are necrotic typically exhibit lower extracellular pH than surrounding normal tissues. As inflammatory and immune cells invade the tumor stroma, these cells also release protons that generate a local acidosis.12, 19

Animal and clinical studies of bone cancer have reported that the antiresorptive effects of bisphosphonate therapies simultaneously reduce bone cancer pain, tumor-induced bone destruction, and tumor growth within the bone.12, 13, 21 Bisphosphonates are a class of antiresorptive compounds that are pyrophosphate analogues which display high affinity for calcium ions, causing them to rapidly and avidly bind to the mineralized matrix of bone.15 As osteoclasts resorb bone they use endocytosis and transcytosis to clear the bone breakdown products from the osteoclast–bone interface (including the bisphosphonate, which is bound to the mineralized bone). Bisphosphonates, once taken up by the osteoclasts, induce loss of function and ultimately apoptosis of the osteoclasts.15

It should be stressed that while bisphosphonates are approved and are frequently used to reduce tumor-induced bone destruction and bone cancer pain, bisphosphonates do have unwanted side effects (including induction of arthralgias and osteonecrosis of the jaw),15 and it has yet to be definitively shown that bisphosphonates increase the survival of patients with bone cancer. For this reason, other therapies targeting osteoclasts are already in mid- to late-stage clinical trials and hold significant promise for alleviating bone cancer pain and tumor-induced bone remodeling. One line of therapies attempts to block the binding of receptor activator for nuclear factor κB ligand (RANKL), which is an essential regulator of osteoclasts.11 Studies in mice have shown that sequestration of RANKL with OPG attenuates sarcoma-induced bone pain, bone remodeling, and tumor growth within the bone (Figs. 4B–E).7 Recent small clinical studies have shown that in humans with multiple myeloma or breast cancer metastasis to bone, Denosumab (a fully humanized monoclonal antibody that inhibits RANKL) markedly reduces tumor-induced bone resorption and skeletal-related events (which include fracture and pain).22 Currently, phase III clinical trials are underway for assessing Denosumab's effects on attenuating cancer-induced bone loss in breast and prostate cancers,23 skeletal related events (pain, fracture) due to the spread of cancer to the bone in multiple myeloma and multiple solid tumors, as well as the potential to delay bone metastases in prostate cancer.24
Osteoprotegerin (OPG) attenuates sarcoma-induced bone destruction in a mouse model of bone cancer pain. (A) Low-power frontal radiograph of mouse pelvis and hind limbs following unilateral injection of 2472 murine osteosarcoma cells into the distal end of the femur and closure of the injection with a dental amalgam plug (arrow). The amalgam plug was used to prevent tumor cells from growing outside the bone. High-resolution radiographs of sham-injected (B and D) and sarcoma-injected (C and E) femurs from mice that received vehicle (B and C) or OPG (D and E). Note that at day 17 after the injection of the osteosarcoma cells, there is significant bone destruction in the distal femur without OPG (C; white arrowhead), whereas tumor induced bone destruction is not evident in sarcoma-injected mouse that received OPG (E). Scale bars represent 10 mm (a) and 0.5 mm (b−e; bottom panel). (With permission from Honore, P. et al.7)

The mechanisms by which inhibition of osteoclast activity (either by bisphosphonates or OPGL/RANKL binding molecules) attenuates bone cancer pain may involve, at least in part, the reduction of osteoclast-induced acidosis. Tissue acidosis may activate nociceptors that innervate the bone through multiple mechanisms,12, 18 but TRPV1 has been proposed to play a major role in acid-induced activation of nociceptors (Fig. 3B). Recent pharmacological studies showed that selective TRPV1 antagonists significantly decreased ongoing (JNJ-17203212, ABT-102, and SB366791) and movement-evoked (JNJ-17203212 and ABT-102) pain-related behaviors in the mouse model of bone cancer pain, without any observable behavioral side effects, such as ataxia or hypoactivity.19, 25

Although the above discussion has focused on osteoclast-mediated acidosis as a mechanism that drives bone cancer pain, both osteolytic and osteoblastic tumors induce a loss of the mechanical strength and stability of the tumor-bearing bone so that normally innocuous mechanical stress can now produce distortion of the mechanosensitive sensory nerve fibers that innervate the bone (Fig. 3B). Previous results have shown that the pain associated with fracture is significantly attenuated if the bone is stabilized and returned to its normal orientation.26 Preservation of the mechanical strength of bone should reduce movement-induced incident pain, as this pain is probably driven by activation of normally silent mechanosensitive nociceptors that innervate the bone.

Tumor-derived products in generation of bone cancer pain
In most cancers, the tumor mass is composed of tumor and tumor stromal cells, the latter of which includes macrophages, neutrophils, T-lymphocytes, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. Tumor and/or tumor stromal cells have been shown to secrete a variety of factors that sensitize or directly excite primary afferent neurons (Fig. 3). These factors include prostaglandins, bradykinin, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, endothelins, interleukins-1 and -6, epidermal growth factor, transforming growth factor-alpha, platelet-derived growth factor, and nerve growth factor (NGF) (Fig. 3).12, 27

One tumor/stromal cell product that is of significant interest in the etiology of bone cancer pain is NGF. Previous studies have shown that NGF may directly activate sensory neurons that express the TrkA receptor and/or modulate the expression of proteins of sensory neurons expressing TrkA or p75 receptor (Fig. 3).28 Anti-NGF antibody therapy may be particularly effective in blocking bone cancer pain as NGF appears to be integrally involved in the upregulation, sensitization, and disinhibition of multiple neurotransmitters, ion channels and receptors in the primary afferent nerve fibers that synergistically increase nociceptive signals originating from the tumor-bearing bone.

To test the hypothesis that blocking NGF from binding to its cognate receptor TrkA is efficacious in reducing bone cancer pain, the analgesic efficacy of a murine anti-NGF monoclonal antibody was evaluated in two animal models of bone cancer.10, 29 These models included the primarily osteolytic mouse osteosarcoma line that expresses high levels of NGF,29 and the primarily osteoblastic canine ACE-1 prostate, where NGF expression is undetectable (Fig. 5).10 In both of these models it was demonstrated that administration of an anti-NGF antibody was efficacious in reducing both early- and late-stage bone cancer pain-related behaviors (Fig. 5) and that this reduction in pain-related behaviors was greater than that achieved with acute administration of 10 mg/kg of morphine sulfate.10, 29 This data suggests that therapeutic targeting of NGF, or its cognate receptor TrkA, may be useful in blocking bone cancer pain whether or not the tumor that has metastasized to bone expresses NGF. Presumably, in the case where the tumor cells themselves do not express NGF, it is the tumor stromal cells that are expressing and secreting NGF, as tumor stromal cells comprise 2–60% of the total tumor mass. Currently, a fully humanized monoclonal antibody to NGF (Tanezumab) has been tested in human patients with osteoarthritis (OA) and this therapy was effective at reducing OA pain.30 Human clinical trials evaluating Tanezumab's effects at reducing bone cancer pain in patients with advanced breast or prostate cancer were scheduled to commence mid-2009.31 
Anti-NGF attenuates spontaneous bone cancer pain in a model where the tumor cells (canine prostate cells) do not express NGF. Anti-NGF treatment (10 mg/kg, i.p., given on days 7, 12, and 17 posttumor injection) attenuated ongoing bone cancer pain behavior on days 7–19 posttumor injection. In these experiments, canine prostate carcinoma (ACE-1) cells were injected into the femur of adult male mice. The time spent guarding (A) and number of spontaneous flinches (B) of the afflicted limb over a 2-minute observation period were used as measures of ongoing pain. Anti-NGF significantly reduced ongoing pain behaviors in tumor-injected mice as compared with ACE-1 + vehicle. Note that ACE-1 cells in vitro express undetectable levels of NGF mRNA or protein, suggesting that NGF could be released mainly from tumor-associated macrophage and immune cells. Bars represent mean ± S.E.M. *P < 0.05 versus sham + vehicle; #P < 0.05 versus ACE-1 + vehicle. (With permission from Halvorson, K.G. et al.10)

Neuropathic component of bone cancer pain
Because sensory and sympathetic neurons are present within the bone marrow, mineralized bone, and periosteum, and all these compartments are ultimately impacted by fractures, ischemia, or the presence of tumor cells, sensory fibers in any of these tissues may play a role in the generation and maintenance of bone cancer pain.

In examining the changes in the sensory innervation of bone that are induced by the primarily osteolytic sarcoma cells, sensory fibers were observed at and within the leading edge of the tumor in the deep stromal regions of the tumor.32 These sensory nerve fibers displayed a discontinuous and fragmented appearance, suggesting that following initial activation by the osteolytic tumor cells, the distal processes of the sensory nerve fibers were injured by the invading tumor cells.32

The tumor-induced injury and/or remodeling of sensory nerve fibers in these bone cancer pain models was also accompanied by an increase in ongoing and movement-evoked pain behaviors, an upregulation of galanin by sensory neurons that innervate the tumor-bearing femur, an upregulation of glial fibrillary acidic protein, hypertrophy of satellite cells surrounding sensory neuron cell bodies within the ipsilateral DRG, and macrophage infiltration of the DRG ipsilateral to the tumor-bearing femur.12 Similar neurochemical changes have been described following peripheral nerve injury in other noncancerous neuropathic pain states.33 In addition, chronic treatment with Gabapentin in the sarcoma model attenuated both ongoing and movement-evoked bone cancer-related pain behaviors, but did not influence tumor growth or tumor-induced bone destruction.32 In light of these findings, we can suggest that bone cancer pain is driven by a neuropathic pain component. Currently, clinical trials are underway for assessing the effects of pregabalin (structurally related to gabapentin) on attenuating chronic bone pain related to metastases.34

Conclusions
Over the last decade, progress has been made in laying the foundation for a mechanism-based understanding of the factors that drive bone cancer pain. Interestingly, several therapies that attenuate bone cancer pain may also reduce tumor growth and tumor-induced bone remodeling. Thus, bisphosphonates are commonly used to treat bone cancer pain and other therapies including Denosumab (anti-RANKL; Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA), Tanezumab (anti-NGF; Pfizer Inc., New York, NY), and Pregabalin (Pfizer) are in mid- to late-stage clinical trials. We are beginning to understand the mechanisms that drive bone cancer. If this progress can be sustained and expanded, these advances have the potential to enlarge the repertoire of therapies available to treat bone cancer pain and significantly improve the quality of life, functional status, and survival of affected patients.

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.  
Abstract
Although bone cancer pain can be severe and is relatively common, very little is known about the basic mechanisms that generate and maintain this debilitating pain. To begin to define the mechanisms that give rise to bone cancer pain, a mouse model was developed using the intramedullary injection and containment of osteolytic sarcoma cells in the mouse femur. These tumor cells induced bone destruction as well as ongoing and movement-evoked pain behaviors similar to that found in patients with bone cancer pain. In addition, there was a significant reorganization of the spinal cord that received sensory input from the cancerous bone, and this reorganization was significantly different from that observed in mouse models of chronic neuropathic or inflammatory pain. To determine whether this mouse model of bone cancer could be used to define the basic mechanisms giving rise to bone cancer pain, we targeted excessive osteoclast activity using osteoprotegerin, a secreted decoy receptor that inhibits osteoclast activity. Osteoprotegerin blocked excessive tumor-induced, osteoclast-mediated bone destruction, and significantly reduced ongoing and movement-evoked pain, and the neurochemical reorganization of the spinal cord. These data suggest that this model can provide insight into the mechanisms that generate bone cancer pain and provide a platform for developing and testing novel analgesics to block bone cancer pain.  
As advances in cancer detection and therapy have extended the life expectancy of cancer patients, there is increasing focus on improving the patient's quality of life. More than 1.2 million cases of cancer will be diagnosed in 2000 in the United States alone. Approximately 30% to 50% of all cancer patients will experience pain, and between 75% and 90% of patients with advanced cancer will experience significant, life-altering, cancer-induced pain. One common type of cancer pain that is difficult to treat is bone cancer pain [1–3]. This pain occurs in patients with primary bone cancer (sarcoma or hematologic malignancies) and more commonly in patients with cancer that has metastasized to bone from distant sites such as the breast, prostate, ovary, and lung [4].

The most common symptom of bone cancer is pain [5–7]. This pain is dull, constant, increases with time, and is exacerbated by use of involved portions of the skeleton. As bone cancer progresses, intermittent episodes of extreme pain occur spontaneously, or after weight bearing or movement of the affected limb [8–10]. Bone cancer pain is commonly associated with radiographic evidence of cancer-induced bone destruction. It has been suspected that all painful bone cancers, whether primary or metastatic, induce pain at least in part by stimulating bone destruction, as the extent of bone destruction is usually correlated with ongoing pain and with the severity and frequency of intermittent episodes of incapacitating pain [6,7].

Existing pharmacological treatments for bone cancer pain can be ineffective, burdensome to administer, and fraught with side effects [11,12]. The neurobiologic bases for these treatments are empirical and based on scientific advances in understanding the pathophysiology of other painful conditions. The greatest obstacle to developing new treatments for persistent cancer pain and/or optimally coordinating existing treatments is a paucity of knowledge of the basic neurobiology of cancer pain. There is no well-accepted animal model of cancer pain, and the majority of what we know about the neurochemistry of cancer pain has been obtained from clinical studies on how to best manage pain in patients with cancer. Developing and characterizing a model of bone cancer pain and defining the cellular and neurochemical changes responsible for bone cancer pain would significantly improve the probability of identifying novel treatments for this condition.

Model of Bone Cancer Pain
Over the past decade, a major thrust in pain research has been to shift the process of discovering novel analgesics from one based on empirical observations, to one based on a mechanistic understanding of the biology involved in the generation and maintenance of different pain states. In an attempt to define the mechanisms that are important in the generation and maintenance of bone cancer pain, we hypothesized that cancer-induced bone destruction contributes to the pain. The murine model was induced by injecting murine osteolytic sarcoma cells into the intramedullary space of the murine femur (Figure 1); this model appears to share many similarities with bone cancer pain seen in humans [13]. A critical step was to ensure that the osteolytic cancer cells are confined within the intramedullary space of the femur and do not invade adjacent soft tissues. To accomplish this, following injection of sarcoma cells into the intramedullary canal of the femur, the injection hole in the bone was sealed by placement of an amalgam plug. This confinement of the tumor to the intramedullary space of the bone more closely mimics the condition in patients with primary or metastatic bone cancers. 
Sarcoma-induced bone destruction in the mouse femur. Low power radiograph of the murine pelvis and hind limbs after a unilateral injection of sarcoma cells into the distal part of the femur, and obturation of the injection site with an amalgam plug (A, see arrow). Note the loss of mineralized bone (white) in the proximal and distal head of the cancerous femur with the amalgam plug, in contrast to the normal contralateral femur. High-resolution radiographs of sarcoma-injected femora (0–3) showing the progressive loss of bone due to tumor growth. Bone destruction was quantified on a 0-to-3 scale based on the loss of bone. Images 0 to 3 are examples of each state of destruction: (0) normal bone with no signs of destruction; (1) bone destruction just detectable; (2) loss of medullary bone and erosion of cortical bone; (3) full thickness cortical bone loss and displaced skeletal fracture. Line bar = 2mm.

As the tumor cells grew into the intramedullary space of the femur and replaced the normal bone marrow, bone destruction was monitored using radiographic analysis. By day 6, a small number of pits of bone destruction were detectable and from that point on, bone destruction progressed with increased pitted appearance, loss of medullary bone, and erosion of cortical bone up to displaced skeletal fracture at day 21 after sarcoma cell injection (Figure 1). At the same time, we observed an increase in the number of osteoclasts in the sarcoma-injected bone. Parallel to the increased bone destruction, tumor-bearing mice showed signs of ongoing and stimulus-evoked pain behaviors (Figure 2). In addition, in the ipsilateral spinal cord segments that receive primary afferent input from the cancerous femur, we detected several notable neurochemical changes that peaked at lumbar level L4, the major termination site of sensory fibers that innervate the femur. First, there was an increase in the pro-hyperalgesic peptide dynorphin in the deep dorsal horn [14–22]. Second, there was an increase in the basal number of immediate early gene protein product C-fos positive neurons located in the deep dorsal horn [23–31]. Third, there was a massive astrocytic hypertrophy (Figure 3). Lastly, signs of primary afferent sensitization were also observed as a normally non-noxious palpation of the femur induced release of substance P, substance P receptor internalization [32–36], and C-fos expression [29, 31, 37–40] in lamina I spinal neuron. All these changes were correlated to the extent of bone destruction [13]. 
Spontaneous and movement-evoked pain behaviors observed in sarcoma-injected mice. Results include the number of spontaneous flinching behaviors in a 2-minute observation period (A) and the nocifensive behaviors during a 2-minute period of normally non-noxious palpation of the femur (B) 17 days after sham and sarcoma injections into the femur of animals that subsequently received vehicle or osteoprotegerin (OPG). Values represent mean ± SEM. Daily OPG treatment significantly reduced both spontaneous and palpation-evoked nociceptive behaviors observed in sarcoma-injected animals. Dashed line indicates baseline value. One-way ANOVA, Fisher PLSD, *P <.05, **P <.01, ***P <.001.
Confocal image showing astrocyte hypertrophy with immunostaining for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) in coronal sections of the L4 spinal cord, 21 days following injection of osteolytic sarcoma cells into the intramedullary space of the femur. Note that the up regulation of GFAP is almost exclusively ipsilateral to the femur with tumor-induced bone destruction. This confocal image was taken from a 60-μm thick tissue and is projected from 6 optical sections acquired at 4-μm intervals with a 20× lens, scale bar = 200 μm.

In assessing any experimental animal model, it is important to determine how well the model approximates the human disease. The most common symptom of bone metastases in humans is bone pain. Bone destruction can lead to pathological fractures and/or hypercalcemia [6, 7, 41, 42]. Over weeks or months, as the tumor grows and stimulates bone destruction, pain progressively becomes more severe [8, 9]. With increased bone destruction and time, the pain intensifies and can incapacitate the affected individual. As bone destruction progresses, acute pain is frequently observed when the involved bone is moved or palpated. In humans, the extent of bone destruction, and particularly ongoing osteolytic activity, is correlated with the severity and frequency of breakthrough pain [43].

The murine model appears to mirror many of the features found in humans with bone cancer-induced pain. The osteolytic sarcoma cell line aggressively destroys bone and provides localized pathologic findings similar to that found in human osteolytic bone cancer [44–46]. Mice with bone cancer exhibit painful behaviors and these behaviors correlate with the extent of bone destruction [13]. Severe acute pain is also observed in mice once significant bone destruction has occurred, as normally non-noxious palpation of the affected bone results in behaviors indicative of severe pain; this severe pain is again correlated with the extent of bone destruction.

Neurochemical Signature of Inflammatory, Neuropathic, and Bone Cancer Pain
The mouse model of cancer pain induced behavioral, cellular, and neurochemical changes that were correlated with the degree of tumor growth and bone destruction [13]; but it remained unclear whether cancer pain is a unique type of pain or merely a subtype of inflammatory or neuropathic pain. Previous studies, performed primarily in the rat, have suggested that there are distinct differences in the neurochemical changes that occur in the spinal cord and primary afferent neurons in inflammatory and neuropathic pain states [47]. These findings have generated significant interest, as these neurochemical changes may be involved in the different clinical symptoms. Interestingly, these neurochemical differences mirror the fact that many analgesics are most efficacious in specific types of persistent pain [48].

In comparing the neurochemical changes that take place in mouse models of bone cancer pain with those that occur in inflammatory or neuropathic pain [49], the most remarkable finding is how distinct the changes are with each type of persistent pain state. For example, in the inflammatory model, there was a significant up regulation of SP and CGRP in the dorsal horn, while there was a down regulation of these same primary afferent neurotransmitters in the neuropathic models. In contrast, in the cancer pain model, there was no significant change in either of these neurotransmitters. Likewise galanin and neuropeptide Y, two neuropeptides, were dramatically up regulated in DRG neurons in models of neuropathy, whereas no change was observed in these neurotransmitters in cancer pain.

Even more dramatic were the different neurochemical changes that each pain state induced in the spinal cord. The greatest change we observed in the spinal cord in response to cancer pain was a massive astrogliosis that was not observed in models of inflammatory or neuropathic pain [49]. These data argue that cancer pain is not merely a form of inflammation or neuropathy pain, but rather, is a distinct pain entity. Determining which neurochemical changes are involved in generating and/or maintaining each type of persistent pain should provide a mechanistic platform for designing therapies specifically targeting these different pain states.

Mechanism-based Therapy for Bone Cancer Pain
To begin to define the mechanisms that give rise to bone cancer pain, we targeted excessive osteoclast activity using osteoprotegerin (OPG), a secreted decoy receptor that inhibits osteoclast activity [50]. Osteoclasts are the body's principal bone-resorbing cell; and it has recently been shown that the formation, survival, and bone-resorbing activity of these cells can be potently inhibited by the soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) family molecule osteoprotegerin (OPG) [51–53]. Soluble TNFRs are thought to bind to their cognate ligands, thus sequestering their ligands and preventing them from activating their cellular targets. A major action of OPG appears to be that it binds to and/or sequesters OPG ligand (OPGL). In the adult, one of the richest sources of OPGL is the osteoblast, a cell critically involved in skeletal homeostasis. Osteoblasts participate directly in bone formation and indirectly by regulating, via OPGL production, osteoclast-mediated bone resorption, as OPGL potently stimulates osteoclast development and activates mature, pre-existing osteoclasts [51,53]. Thus, OPG rapidly inhibits osteoclast activity so that 2 days following a single injection of OPG, there is a significant inhibition of bone resorption [52,54].

In sarcoma-bearing mice that received OPG treatment, there was near total elimination of both tumor-induced bone destruction and osteoclasts at sites of tumor. In addition, OPG significantly reduced, by approximately one-half, both ongoing and movement-evoked pain behaviors and the neurochemical reorganization of the spinal cord. These results show that osteoclast-induced bone destruction plays a role in bone cancer pain. There are several mechanisms by which osteoclasts may be involved in generating and maintaining bone cancer pain. For osteoclasts to resorb bone, they must maintain an extracellular microenvironment at acidic pH (4.0–5.0) at the osteoclast-mineralized bone interface [55]. A population of sensory neurons that innervate bone expresses acid-sensing ion channels and vanilloid receptors [56]. These neurons could be excited and/or sensitized if exposed to the osteoclast-induced acidic extracellular microenvironment. Sensory neurons have been shown to be excited and/or sensitized by growth factors [57,58], and a variety of growth factors reside in bone and are released during cancer-induced bone resorption. Additionally, as the tumor continues to induce excessive osteoclast bone resorption, over time the bone is weakened, becomes mechanically compromised, and ultimately will fracture.

There is a portion of bone cancer pain that continues despite inhibition of cancer-induced bone resorption, as OPG administration reduces but does not completely abolish the pain behaviors (Figure 2). Previous studies have suggested that there is relatively little direct sensory or sympathetic innervation of tumors [59], although both mineralized bone and bone marrow receive sensory and sympathetic innervation [60–62]. Malignant cells are known to secrete prostaglandins, endothelins, cytokines, epidermal growth factor, transforming growth factor, and platelet-derived growth factor; and many of these factors have been shown to excite primary afferent nociceptors [63–69]. Our data suggest that there is a component of bone cancer pain caused by tumor-secreted factors that directly sensitizes and/or activates primary afferent fibers that innervate bone and induce central sensitization in the spinal cord.

Abstract
The mouse model of bone cancer pain shares many features with bone cancer pain encountered in humans. Thus, in addition to bone destruction, there is also peripheral sensitization of primary afferent fibers and central sensitization with an accompanying neurochemical reorganization of the spinal cord. While osteoclasts play a significant role in bone cancer pain, other factors are clearly involved in generating and maintaining bone cancer pain. The mouse model of bone cancer pain should begin to allow definition of the basic mechanisms that generate and maintain bone cancer pain, which should permit the development of novel, mechanism-based therapies.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH grants NINDS NS23970, NIDA 11986, NIDCR training grant DEO7288, AR43595, and a Merit Review from the Veterans Administration. 
Abstract
Summary Melanoma and non-melanoma (basal and squamous cell carcinoma) skin cancer (NMSC) are now the most common types of cancer in the white populations and the incidence of skin cancer has reached epidemic proportions. According to recent population-based studies from Australia the incidence rate is over 2% for basal cell carcinoma in males and 1% for squamous cell carcinoma, and there are over 50 new cases of melanoma per 100 000.

Introduction
Currently, according to the Skin Cancer Foundation, one in six Americans will develop skin cancer during their lifetime.1 Identification and avoidance of risk factors are needed to stop this increasing trend. Additionally, early diagnosis and treatment are needed to decrease the number of deaths due to skin cancer because prognosis improves when lesions are detected early, for both melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer. In this article, current epidemiological data concerning the incidence, mortality, environmental influences, and predisposing host conditions for melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer will be discussed.

Nonmelanoma skin cancer (basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma)
Nonmelanoma skin cancers (NMSCs) constitute more than one-third of all cancers in the U.S. with an estimated incidence of over 600 000 cases per year.2 NMSCs are the most common malignancies occurring in the white populations each year. Of these 600 000 cases, approximately 500 000 are basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) and 100 000–150 000 are squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). The standardized ratio of BCC to SCC is roughly 4 : 1.2 The incidence of NMSC (BCC and SCC) is 18–20 times greater than that of malignant melanoma. However, incidence data of high epidemiological quality on NMSC are sparse because traditional cancer registries often exclude NMSC or are at least incomplete. Miller and Weinstock3 estimated the 1994 NMSC incidence to be higher, between 900 000 and 1 200 000. The lifetime risks were estimated to be 28% to 33% for BCC and 7% to 11% for SCC (lifetime risk of developing NMSC for a child born in 1994).

In Table 1 the age-standardized rates of NMSC in white populations per 100 000 population from Australia, the U.S. and Europe are presented. This table is based on selected studies reported after 1990. Silverberg et al.2 estimated the average annual incidence of BCC in the U.S. at 191 new lesions per 100 000 white persons. According to the estimates (lowest and highest estimated incidence rates) of Miller & Weinstock,3 the age-adjusted incidence rates per 100 000 white people per year (1994) in the U.S. were as follows: BCC (men) 407–485, BCC (women) 212–253, SCC (men) 81–136, SCC (women) 26–59. For South Wales (U.K.) the age-standardized (world standard population) incidence rates per 100 000 population in 1998 were lower: BCC (men) 127·9, BCC (women) 104·8, SCC (men) 25·2, SCC (women) 8·6,4 but much higher compared to other reports from Europe. Although these incidence rates are high, they do not approach the rates described from Australia, where the incidence is 1% to 2% per year (1000–2000 per 100 000 per year). Both studies were population-based epidemiological surveys that were based on clinically confirmed skin cancers reported in a random sample of residents of Nambour, Queensland, and in Townsville, a tropical city in North Queensland. Results from Townsville, Australia: BCC (male) 2058, BCC (female) 1195, SCC (male) 1332, SCC (female) (755)5; Nambour, Australia: BCC (male) 2074, BCC (female) 1579, SCC (male) 1035, SCC (female) 472.6 In contrast, estimates based on cancer registers were much lower. Following the Tasmanian Cancer Registry the incidence rates were as follows: BCC (male) 145, BCC (female) 83, SCC (male) 64, SCC (female) 20.7 All states of Australia operate cancer registers and provide basic epidemiological data for malignant melanoma, but only the Tasmanian Cancer Register processed information on NMSCs. Systematic and complete recording of NMSCs is difficult or even unlikely to be achieved because of the large numbers involved, the rarity with which these lesions require hospital treatment and the large proportion of clinically recognized skin cancers that can be treated destructively without histological confirmation of the diagnosis. Therefore few cancer registries in the world routinely collect notifications of NMSCs, thus necessitating special surveys. No such surveys exist for Europe.

Table 1. Age-standardized rates of NMSC in whites per 100·000 population from Australia, U.S. and Europe (selected studies after 1990) 
Rates of skin cancer
The incidence of NMSC is increasing rapidly. In white populations in Europe, the U.S., Canada, and Australia the average increase of NMSC was 3–8% per year since the 1960s.14, 15 The rising incidence rates of NMSC is probably due to a combination of increased sun exposure or exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light, increased outdoor activities, changes in clothing style, increased longevity, and ozone depletion.1 The incidence of NMSC in white populations increases proportionally with proximity to the equator, with the incidence of SCC doubling for each 8–10-degree decline in latitude.16 UV dosage per unit time at the equator in the Pacific is very high, about 200% that of Europe or the northern U.S, and 30% higher than that of the southern U.S.17 The incidence of NMSC is elevated in individuals with a high cumulative exposure to UV light, but the paradox of the lack of quantitative evidence of a causal link between sun exposure and skin cancer was found in outdoor workers.6 Incidence also increases with age; according to Holme et al.4 in 1998 the incidence of BCC in individuals over 75 years old was approximately 5 times higher than that of individuals between 50 and 55 years old, and for SCC approximately 35 times higher. The incidence of SCC increases more rapidly with age than does BCC.

The reported increases in the incidence of skin cancer have been attributed partially to a larger amount of UVB radiation reaching the surface of the earth as a result of ozone depletion in the atmosphere. The ozone layer has decreased by approximately 2% over the past 20 years.18 For a 1% decrease in total column atmospheric ozone an increase of 2·7% in non-melanoma skin cancer was to be expected.19 It was estimated that the additional UV radiation over lifetime due to a 2% decrease in ozone concentration will cause a 6–12% increase in NMSC in exposed populations.18, 19 However, the thickness of the ozone layer over the northern hemisphere has declined by 10–40% during the winter and spring months.20 As a rule a 10% reduction in the ozone layer thickness causes a 20% increase in UV-radiation and a 40% increase in skin cancers.20 Thus relatively minor changes in ozone layer thickness have a marked impact on human health such that global action is required.21 Slaper and collegues22 have suggested that if no control measures are enforced, 233 annual additional cases of skin cancer per million at risk will occur by the year 2030, and 1890 cases per million by the year 2070 in the U.S.

Chronic sun exposure is the main cause of NMSC. Over 80% of NMSCs occur on areas of the body that are frequently exposed to sunlight, such as the head, neck, and back of the hands. BCC is also most commonly found on the nose. Buettner and Raasch5 estimated body site- and gender-specific incidence rates for skin cancer. For NMSC the highest body site-specific incidence rates were found for lip, orbit, naso-labial (BCC male 57111, female 39780; SCC male 18780, female 7308) and ear, nose, cheek (BCC male 56402, female 29879; SCC male 16321, female 7643) compared to, for example, the dorsum of the hands (BCC male 1493, female 515; SCC male 5897, female 4098).

There is an increased risk of NMSC in white populations, especially those with blue eyes, a fair complexion, skin type I and II (sunburn easily, suntan poorly, freckle with sun exposure), and red or blond hair. NMSC is uncommon in black populations, Asians, and Hispanics.23, 24 There is a higher incidence of BCC in albino blacks than in normally pigmented black populations. In contrast to white populations, sunlight does not appear to be an important aetiological factor for SCC in black populations because lesions occur on non-sun-exposed regions of the body. SCC in black populations arises most often on sites of pre-existing inflammatory skin conditions, burn injuries, or trauma. SCC in blacks is often seen in scars, burns, or ulcers.25

The aetiology of SCC is multifactorial. Immunosuppression increases the risk of SCC. In renal transplant patients, the cumulative incidence of developing skin cancer, calculated by life table analysis, increased progressively from 7% after 1 year of immunosuppression to 45% after 11 years and to 70% after 20 years. 26

Chemical carcinogens such as arsenic, tobacco, coal-tar products and psoralens can also promote the development of NMSC, primarily SCC. Ionizing radiation also increases the risk of NMSC, especially SCC. Additionally, several medical conditions such as chronic ulcers, burn scars, human papillomavirus infection, and various genetic syndromes (e.g. xeroderma pigmentosum, albinism, epidermodysplasia verruciformis) can be associated with an increased risk of NMSC, especially of SCC.

Once an individual develops an NMSC, there is an increased risk that a new skin cancer will appear within the next few years. The highest risk of a subsequent NMSC occurs within the first year.27 In a follow-up study, 52% developed subsequent NMSCs within 5 years of therapy for their first SCC.28 Therefore all patients with NMSC should be followed up for least 5 years after treatment.

BCC arises de novo, which means there are no known precursor lesions. Precursor lesions for SCC include actinic keratoses (AC) and Bowen's disease (SCC in situ). Actinic keratoses (AK) usually occur in fair-skinned individuals over 45 years of age (skin type I or II). In Australia and in the south-western U.S., younger people are affected more frequently. Accurate figures on the prevalence and incidence are hard to obtain. Approximately 5–20% of AKs will transform into SCC within 10–25 years.29 Using Marks and colleagues' data,29 Dodson et al.30 calculated that the theoretical risk of malignant transformation for an average patient with AKs followed up for 10 years would be 6·1% to 10·2%. By treating AKs the development of SCC can be prevented.

Persons with occupational or recreational outdoor exposure, as well as those living at latitudes closer to the equator have higher incidence rates. Additionally, a 20th-century change in fashion that dictated that a deep suntan in a fair-skinned person is associated with increased socio-economic status, has led to skin cancer and its precursors now being endemic in many parts of the world. Prevention of NMSC is extremely important because the prognosis improves substantially with early detection. Therefore, patients and physicians have to be educated how to detect skin cancers early and unprotected exposure of the skin to UV light has to be decreased or eliminated.

Malignant melanoma
Malignant melanoma (MM) occurs among all adequately studied racial and ethnic groups. Its incidence is much lower compared to NMSCs but has been rising in fair-skinned populations throughout the world for several decades.31 In Fig. 1 the age standardized incidence rates for BCC, SCC and MM are presented for the North Humberside, U.K. for the year 1978 and 1991.10 The annual increase varies between populations but in general has been estimated to be between 3 and 7%, with mortality rates increasing less quickly. These estimates suggest a doubling of rates every 10–20 years. Cutaneous malignant melanoma is the most rapidly increasing cancer in white populations. The frequency of its occurrence is closely associated with the constitutive colour of the skin, and depends on the geographical zone. Incidence among dark skinned ethnic groups is 1 per 100 000 per year or less, but is up to 50 per 100 000 per year among light-skinned caucasians, and higher in some areas of the world. The highest incidence rates have been reported from Queensland, Australia with 56 new cases per year per 100 000 for men and 43 for women.32 The current estimated annual incidence of melanoma in the U.S. among white populations, adjusted for the same standard population and for the same year (1987), is 14 and 11.33 In Northern Europe the incidence rates appear more moderate with less than 5 per 100 00034 (4·8 in Germany during the similar time period of 1983–87). 
Age-standardized incidence rates for BCC, SCC and MM in North Humberside, U.K. in the year 1978 and 1991 (according to Ko et al. 1994).

The cumulative lifetime risk for melanoma is now in the order of 1 : 25 in Australia and it has been estimated to be around 1 : 75 in the U.S. by the year 2000.35, 36 Of every 105 Americans born in 1993, one will develop malignant melanoma in their lifetime. In contrast, the risk in 1935 was only 1 in 1500, in 1960 1 in 500, and in 1980 1 in 250.37 Malignant melanoma is now the fourth most common cancer in Australia and New Zealand, the seventh most common in the U.S. and Canada, the tenth most common in Scandinavia and the eighteenth most common in the U.K.38 In contrast, for Africans and Asians the annual incidence rate of malignant melanoma is only 0·2–0·4 per 100 000 population, with lesions affecting mainly the palms, soles and mucous membranes.

Figures from the U.S. suggest a statistically significant increase in thin tumours (<1 mm) in all age groups except in men under 40 years of age. Thick tumours ?4 mm) increased statistically significantly only in American males aged 60 years or older.39

The male : female ratio is 1 : 1 in the U.S. and Australia. In Europe, the sex incidence shows in most countries a slight female preponderance. The sex ratio for incidence of melanoma varies with incidence, being higher in females than in males in areas of low insolation and low incidence rates.

In contrast to NMSC, which mainly affects older individuals, the frequency of melanoma peaks in young people aged 20–45 years, although age-specific rates continue to rise with age. Approximately 50% of melanomas occur in individuals under 55 years of age, and 30% occur in those less than 45 years old.40 It is very rare prior to puberty, and when it does occur in children, about 50% of cases arise in giant congenital nevi.41

The risk factors for melanoma occurring in an individual include a combination of constitutional predisposition (skin colour, tendency to freckle, family history of melanoma, presence of a large number of naevi, increasing age) and exposure to environmental factors (UV light). Sun exposure in childhood and intense intermittent sun exposures are suggested to be the major environmental risk factors.42, 43 Migration studies suggest that childhood is a time of great importance in relation to exposure to sunlight for melanoma in adults.44 However, it appears that the hazardous impact of sunburns persists for the lifetime of the person, and activities concerned with melanoma prevention should be directed to the entire population rather than being focused only on younger age groups.45, 46

Although we talk in general terms about the epidemiology of melanoma, this tumour has been subdivided on the basis of histological and clinical classification into different tumours. Some of these subtypes have different characteristics epidemiologically, in incidence, mortality rates and in likely causative factors (e.g. sunlight exposure).38

Skin cancer and work
In 1775, Sir Percival Pott reported an increased risk of SCC of the scrotum in English chimney-sweeps exposed to coal-tar products. Other chemical carcinogens can also promote the development of NMSC. If a long and sufficiently intensive exposure to those chemicals is given at the workplace, an occupational skin disease can be induced.

However, at many workplaces there is an increased exposure to natural and artificial UV light. This could theoretically induce skin cancer also. However, according to epidemiological studies the situation for skin cancer induced by UV light at work is much more difficult to estimate. For the recognition of an occupational skin cancer, one prerequisite is that the occupational UV exposure must at least double the risk (RR > 2). At the present time there is not enough scientific and epidemiological evidence for all types of skin cancer to support recognition of UV-induced skin cancer as an occupational disease. After studying recent publications, we concluded that epidemiological proof of a risk of at least double the norm (RR > 2) due to occupational UV-radiation could be demonstrated only for squamous cell carcinoma.47 The clear dose–response relationship supports these epidemiological findings. For individual risk assessment, an attributive UV radiation <40% due to occupational factors is required. Under those circumstances squamous cell carcinoma should be recognized and compensated as an occupational disease.

There is a paradoxical relationship of work-related sunlight exposure in that there appears to be a lower risk for melanoma in outdoor workers compared to indoor workers. For melanoma, the suggested reason for this finding is that episodic UV exposure is more dangerous than continual UV exposure. Selection bias could also have distorted the association between occupational sun exposure and skin cancer. Outdoor workers tend to be a self-selected group with fewer of the established phenotypic risk factors for skin cancer and melanoma than those in other occupations, thus explaining the lower than expected risk of skin cancer and melanoma among outdoor workers. In a population-based study from Queensland,6 significant self-selection was observed among outdoor workers, whereby people with fair or medium complexions and a tendency to sunburn were systematically under-represented among those in long-term outdoor occupations although they accounted for more than 80% of the community study sample.

All outdoor workers should however, use the current knowledge to develop safety strategies, such as wearing protective clothing and using sunscreens. In addition, a regular skin check is strongly recommended. 
Skin cancer is less common in persons with skin of color than in light-skinned Caucasians but is often associated with greater morbidity and mortality. Thus, it is crucial that physicians become familiar with skin cancer in persons of color so as to maximize the likelihood of early detection of these tumors. In dark-skinned ethnic groups, squamous cell carcinoma is most common; squamous cell carcinoma and melanoma usually occur on nonsun-exposed sites; and ultraviolet radiation is not an important etiologic factor for skin cancer with the exception of basal cell carcinoma. Races of intermediate pigmentation, such as Hispanics and Asians, share epidemiologic and clinical features of dark-skinned ethnic groups and Caucasians. Skin cancers pose a significant risk in skin of color and clinicians should focus on preventive measures in these groups such as regular skin exams, self-examination, public education, and screening programs.

Learning objective
At the completion of this learning activity, participants should be familiar with the epidemiology and unique clinical features of skin cancer in skin of color and be aware of strategies to prevent skin cancer in skin of color.
Abstract
Skin cancer is the most common type of cancer in fair-skinned populations in many parts of the world. The incidence, morbidity and mortality rates of skin cancers are increasing and, therefore, pose a significant public health concern. Ultraviolet radiation (UVR) is the major etiologic agent in the development of skin cancers. UVR causes DNA damage and genetic mutations, which subsequently lead to skin cancer. A clearer understanding of UVR is crucial in the prevention of skin cancer. This article reviews UVR, its damaging effects on the skin and its relationship to UV immunosuppression and skin cancer. Several factors influence the amount of UVR reaching the earth’s surface, including ozone depletion, UV light elevation, latitude, altitude, and weather conditions. The current treatment modalities utilizing UVR (i.e. phototherapy) can also predispose to skin cancers. Unnecessary exposure to the sun and artificial UVR (tanning lamps) are important personal attributable risks. This article aims to provide a comprehensive overview of skin cancer with an emphasis on carefully evaluated statistics, the epidemiology of UVR-induced skin cancers, incidence rates, risk factors, and preventative behaviors & strategies, including personal behavioral modifications and public educational initiatives.
Burden of skin cancer
Skin cancer is the most common type of cancer in light skinned populations around the world.1 Skin cancers are mainly divided into melanoma, and nonmelanoma skin cancers (NMSCs), the latter including basal and squamous cell carcinomas (BCC and SCC, respectively). Melanoma is responsible for most of the cancer related mortalities, and NMSCs are typically described as having a more benign course with locally aggressive features. Nevertheless, they represent “the most common type” of cancer in humans and they can result in significant disfigurement, leading to adverse physical and psychological consequences for the affected patients.2

Nonmelanoma skin cancers
It is estimated that 2–3 million cases of NMSCs occur worldwide each year.3, 4 The incidence varies with very high rates in the Caucasian populations of the world.2 For incidence, the overall upward trend observed in most parts of Europe, Canada, USA and Australia shows an average increase between 3% and 8% a year.1 The incidence of NMSCs is over 1.3 million cases each year in the U.S.; in fact, this incidence rate is “expected to double in the next 30 years.”5 Approximately 30% of all newly diagnosed cancers in the U.S. are BCC, making it the most commonly diagnosed cancer in this country.6

Basal cell carcinoma, which accounts for 80–85% of all NMSCs, rarely metastasizes to other organs.2 It is the most common malignancy in white people. Its worldwide incidence is increasing by up to 10%, “with highest rates in elderly men and increasing incidence in young women.”7 Although mortality is low, this malignancy causes considerable morbidity and places a huge burden on healthcare systems worldwide.7 SCC, which accounts for 15–20% of all NMSCs, is more likely to invade other tissues and can cause death.2

As a result of the benign nature of NMSC characteristics, some patients may remain unregistered and undiagnosed, leading to an under-representation of the number of cases.2 Moreover, as NMSCs have localized symptoms and primarily manifest in older individuals, they may remain undiagnosed.

Basal cell carcinoma and SCC are usually found in sun-exposed areas, especially the head and neck regions.8, 9 They are both positively related to the amount of ultraviolet radiation (UVR) received and inversely proportional to the “degree of skin pigmentation in the population.”2 Women have higher occurrences than men for both types of cancers on the legs, consistent with greater sun exposure at this site.9 In 2006, a study noted that the ratio of BCC to SCC is 4 : 1 for the head and neck.10 The probability of getting SCC is less than getting BCC; however, SCC “carries a > 10-fold higher risk of metastasis and mortality.”6

Melanoma
It is estimated that 132,000 new cases of melanoma occur worldwide each year.3, 4 Incidence rates are at least 16 times greater in Caucasians than African Americans and 10 times greater than Hispanics.10, 11 The WHO also “estimates that as many as 65,161 people a year worldwide die from malignant skin cancer,” approximately 48,000 of whom are registered.3, 12 Melanoma represents only about 3% of all skin cancers in the U.S., but it accounts for about 75% of all skin cancer deaths.12-14 The American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) estimated that in 2009, there will be about 121,840 new melanoma cases in the U.S. with 8650 deaths (∼1 death every hour).12 This mortality value is remarkably high considering the fact that melanoma is nearly always curable in its early stages; however, this high number can be attributed to the late diagnosis of the disease in which the cancer spreads to other parts of the body. Over the last three decades, the incidence and mortality rates of melanoma have increased in the U.S.15 In particular, of all neoplasms, approximately 20–30% of skin cancers are diagnosed in Caucasians, 2–4% are in Asians and 1–2% are in blacks and Asian Indians.10 In 2006, of all skin cancers, melanoma represented 1–8% in blacks, 10–15% in Asian Indians and 19% in Japanese.10 Moreover, even though skin cancers are not as prevalent in individuals with darker skin, they can have more morbidity and fatalities as they may go undiagnosed for a while.10 Melanoma most often appears on the trunk of men and the lower legs of women, although it can be found on the head, neck, or elsewhere.10, 13 Researchers estimate that 1 of 50 people in the U.S. in 2010 will be diagnosed with melanoma at some point in their lives. Specifically, among Caucasians, the rate of increase of melanoma incidence is 3–7% each year. Intermediate skin pigmentations, (i.e., Hispanics and Asians) have skin cancers resembling both Caucasians and dark-skinned groups in terms of clinical presentation and epidemiology. This issue is an important public health concern because by 2050, it is estimated that about half of the U.S. population will consist of Hispanics, Asians and blacks.10

As the incidence of skin cancer is increasing at an alarming rate, it is one of the greatest threats to public health. The pathogenesis of skin cancer is multifactorial. However, UVR (a potent carcinogen) is a major contributing factor.8, 9, 13 Our aim was to provide an overview of skin cancer, its epidemiology, incidence and the relationship of UVR-induced immunosuppression with skin cancer; protective measures and preventative strategies are also mentioned.

Ultraviolet radiation
Sunlight is a continuous spectrum of electromagnetic radiation that is divided into three major spectrums of wavelength: ultraviolet, visible and infrared.16 The UV range is the most significant spectrum of sunlight that causes photoaging and skin cancer. UVR is subdivided into ultraviolet A [UVA (315–400 nm)], ultraviolet B [UVB (280–315 nm)] and ultraviolet C [UVC (100–280 nm)].17 Approximately 90–99% of the solar UVR energy that reaches the earth’s surface is UVA, where only 1–10% is UVB (Table 1).18, 19 One study indicated that about 65–90% of all melanomas are attributable to UVR exposure.20 
UVR and skin cancer pathogenesis
The damaging effects of UVR on the skin are thought to be caused by direct cellular damage and alterations in immunologic function. UVR produces DNA damage (formation of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers), gene mutations, immunosuppression, oxidative stress and inflammatory responses, all of which have an important role in photoaging of the skin and skin cancer.21 In addition to this, UVR creates mutations to p53 tumor suppressor genes; these are genes which are involved in DNA repair or the apoptosis of cells that have lots of DNA damage. Therefore, if p53 genes are mutated, they will no longer be able to aid in the DNA repair process; as a result, there is “dysregulation of apoptosis, expansion of mutated keratinocytes, and initiation of skin cancer.”22 UVA radiation has an important role in the carcinogenesis of stem cells of the skin.22 UVB radiation induces DNA damage, which causes inflammatory responses and tumorigenesis.21

Skin color and photoprotection
The “low incidence of cutaneous malignancies in darker-skinned groups is primarily a result of photoprotection provided by increased epidermal melanin, which provides an inherent sun protection factor (SPF) of up to 13.4 in blacks. Epidermal melanin in blacks filters twice as much UVB radiation as does that in Causasians. Black epidermis transmits 7.4% of UVB and 17.5% of ultraviolet A rays, compared with 24% and 55% in Caucasian epidermis, respectively.10 This is because the larger, more melanized melanosomes in the epidermis of dark skin absorb and scatter more light energy than the smaller, less melanized melanosomes of white skin. The dose of UVR required to produce a minimally perceptible erythema has been estimated to be 6–33 times greater in blacks than in whites.”10

Factors which influence the emission of UVR
Ultraviolet radiation that reaches the earth’s surface can increase or decrease based on a variety of factors. One factor is the ozone layer, which forms a thin shield in the stratospheric atmosphere, protecting life on earth from the sun’s UV rays; this layer absorbs all UVC radiation, most UVB radiation and very little UVA radiation.23 Since the mid 1980s, scientists began to be concerned that the ozone layer was being depleted.24, 25 The reason for thinning of the stratospheric ozone is resulting from the release of ozone-depleting substances and chemicals (chlorofluorocarbons) that are released from industry and motor vehicle exhaust into the atmosphere.24 An approximate 1% decrease in ozone levels corresponds to a 1–2% increase in the mortality caused by melanoma.23 Likewise, a 10% decrease in the ozone levels will cause 300,000 new nonmelanoma and 4500 new melanoma skin cancer cases.4 Depletion of the ozone layer results in increased UVR, (especially UVB, which is the most carcinogenic UVR), reaching the earth’s surface. UVB is directly absorbed by DNA and causes structural DNA damage. UVA causes indirect DNA damage through the formation of reactive oxygen species, which create breaks in DNA. These events lead to mutations and then skin cancer.26 Another factor affecting the level of UVR that reaches the earth’s surface is the time of day and the time of year. The sun exerts its highest peak between 10 am to 4 pm. During this time, the sun’s rays have the least distance to travel through the atmosphere and UVB levels are at their highest. In the early morning and late afternoon, the sun’s rays pass through the atmosphere at an angle and their intensity is greatly reduced. The sun’s angle varies with the seasons, causing the intensity of UV rays to change. UV intensity tends to be the highest during the summer season.23, 27 Environmental factors that increase the amount of UVR exposure to humans include latitudes closer to the equator. At higher latitudes the sun is lower in the sky, so UV rays must travel a greater distance through ozone-rich portions of the atmosphere and in turn, less UVR is emitted. Hence, living closer to the equator increases UV exposure, thus increasing the incidence of skin cancers.23 For every 1000 meters increase in elevation, the UVR intensity increases by 10–12%.17 UV levels also depend on cloud cover; thus, there are lower UV levels at higher cloud cover densities.17 In the summer, “the sun is higher in the sky, and less ultraviolet radiation is absorbed during its passage through the atmosphere. Fog, haze, clouds, and pollutants can reduce ultraviolet levels by 10–90%. Snow, sand, and metal can reflect up to 90% of ultraviolet [radiation]. Sea water can reflect up to 15%, whereas little reflection occurs on still water (e.g., a pool). Shade alone reduces solar UVR by 50–95%. The amount of protection varies considerably between different shade settings, with a beach umbrella showing the least and dense foliage the most protection. The best technique for reducing ultraviolet exposure is to avoid the sun, especially in the middle of the day.”23

UVR and damaging effects
Lifestyle changes during the past five decades, with an increase in exposure to sunlight because of outdoor activities and worsening sunbathing habits often result in skin cancers.8, 13 Among Caucasians, “intense early sunburns and blistering sunburns are closely associated with the development of melanoma.”10 As a result of chronic UV exposure, skin aging, “wrinkles, uneven skin pigmentation, loss of skin elasticity and a disturbance of skin barrier functions” result. These “changes in the skin that superimpose the alterations of chronological aging” refer to photoaging.28 The development of SCCs, BCCs and malignant melanoma is often associated with painful sunburns.29 In fact, “more than 1 severe sunburn in childhood is associated with a 2-fold increase in melanoma risk.”30 Chronic exposure to UVR is known as the most important risk factor for the development of actinic keratoses (precursors of SCC).29 Exposure to UVR during childhood and adolescence plays a role in the future development of skin cancer.31, 32 It was noted that in the US, most people receive 22.73% of their lifetime exposure to the sun by 18 years of age.14 This meant that during childhood (1–18 years of age), most people received approximately one-fifth of their total sun exposure.14 The total amount of sun received over the years, and overexposure resulting in sunburns are associated with skin cancers.31 A history of exposure to sunlight, particularly sunburns, during childhood is also the most important behavioral risk factor for the development of NMSC and melanoma.32, 33

The epidemiology implicating UV exposure as a cause of melanoma is further supported by biological evidence that damage caused by UVR, particularly damage to DNA, plays a central role in the development of melanoma.13 The relative risk of skin cancer is three times as high among people born in areas that receive high amounts of UVR from the sun than those who move to those areas in adulthood.31 Likewise, outdoor workers have a higher risk than indoor workers.20

The aforementioned citations conclude that there is a dose-related relationship between sunlight exposure and the incidence of skin cancer. For the development of BCC and melanoma, intermittent intense exposures appear to carry a higher risk than lower level chronic exposures, even if the total UV dose is the same. By contrast, the risk for SCC is strongly associated with chronic UV exposure but not with intermittent exposure.33 Taken together, epidemiologic studies and experimental studies in laboratory animals indicate that intermittent intense and chronic exposures to solar UVR are the primary cause of NMSCs and melanoma.

UVR-induced immunosuppression
Ultraviolet immunosuppression is considered an important event in skin carcinogenesis.26 UV exposure adversely affects the skin’s immune system by: (1) diminishing antigen-presenting cell function, (2) inducing immunosuppressive cytokine production and (3) modulating contact and delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions.34 The role of UV-induced immunosuppression and its relevance to the mechanism of skin cancer has not been fully elucidated. One study showed that renal transplant recipients, who are taking immunosuppressive therapies, have increased immunosuppression and decreased immunosurveillance; therefore, they are more susceptible to cancers, especially skin cancers (90% being NMSCs). Such individuals are more prone to skin cancer if they have UVR exposure and if they are light-skinned.35 However, skin cancers tend to develop in sun-exposed areas regardless of sun exposure before or after transplantation.23, 36, 54 Among transplant recipients, BCC risk had a linear increase and SCC risk had an exponential increase. Additionally, within this group, older individuals have a faster incidence of skin cancer because of longer UVR exposure over their lifetimes.35, 37

Implications of UVR in clinical therapies and skin cancer
Phototherapy
Phototherapy is currently being used to treat various cutaneous diseases.38, 39 These phototherapies are conducted using broadband UVB (290–320 nm), narrowband UVB (311–313 nm), UVA-1 (340–400 nm), and psoralens plus UVA (PUVA).38-40 Despite the positive aspects of PUVA, its short-term usage is associated with erythema, edema, and sunburns, while its long-term usage is correlated with photoaging and skin cancers.38-40 PUVA therapy is mutagenic and carcinogenic. The determinants of the risk of NMSC and melanomas in PUVA-treated patients can vary with the dose and length of time of exposure to PUVA. Both European and American studies have demonstrated that patients exposed to high doses of PUVA therapy have a substantially increased risk of SCC and melanoma.41-43 Some data also indicate a small but significant increase of BCC.41-43 Patients treated with PUVA may also develop large, irregular, unevenly pigmented, dark lentigines known as “PUVA lentigines,” which may be precursors of melanoma.43 A recent large-scale cohort study revealed that patients who had undergone PUVA therapy were still susceptible to developing skin cancers even after 25 years of discontinuation of PUVA. Therefore, even though PUVA can be a useful tool for treating several skin conditions, it is still a major risk factor for many skin conditions.44

UVR relating to tanning beds and lamps
Every year, approximately 28 million Americans are reported to use artificial UV tanning.45 The National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) warns that solar UVR and exposure to sunlamps and tanning beds are carcinogenic. It has been suggested that artificial UVR is linked to melanoma development.46, 47 The effects of natural and artificial UV exposure may take 20 or more years to produce skin cancer.48 In a study, it was estimated that people using artificial UV tanning have a 2–3 fold increased risk of NMSCs.48, 49 A recent study showed that tanning-bed bulbs emit mostly UVA radiation and ∼5% UVB.50 In general, young women were more frequent users of tanning beds than men. In addition, there is a positive correlation between tanning bed usage and melanoma.50 The other risk factors, in addition to UVR, 
Personal behavioral modification
By being informed of the risks/effects of UV radiation, a few simple changes in behavior and lifestyle may prevent repeated sun damage and skin cancer (Table 3). This can be achieved by (1) minimizing sun exposure (seeking shade) during peak hours (10 am–4 pm), (2) wearing sun-protective clothing (including hats with a brim all around, wrap-around sunglasses, which block both UVA and UVB rays, etc.), (3) using sunscreen with both UVA/UVB & physical blocks on your body and lips, and (4) avoiding tanning beds/lamps – interestingly, “many tanning salon patrons erroneously believe that an artificial tan prevents subsequent sunburn and is safer than tanning outdoors.”50, 51 Several studies have demonstrated that the use of sun-protective wear can decrease the number of moles and pre-malignant lesions.52 
Sunscreens are an important adjunct to other types of protection against UV exposure. Many studies have demonstrated that regular sunscreen use is effective in reducing the incidence of actinic keratoses and SCCs.23 Another randomized trial demonstrated that among children who are at high risk for developing melanoma, sunscreens are effective in reducing moles, the precursors and the strongest risk factors for melanoma.53 The AAD recommends broad-spectrum sunscreen covering both UVA & UVB with a Sun Protection Factor (SPF) of at least 15 with reapplication every 2 h when outdoors, even on cloudy days; additionally, one should make efforts to minimize sun exposure and to apply sunscreen to children 6 months of age and older.54 The AAD and the NIEHS also recommend that the public avoid tanning beds because of their possible association with skin cancers.49, 54 Additionally, patients are advised to perform frequent skin examinations and get complete examinations from health care professionals on a routine basis. Moreover, if a mole is changing color or increasing in size, one should seek medical attention.10

In regard to sunscreen usage, many studies have shown a reduction in several skin conditions and some skin cancers in people, who use sunscreens regularly.23 Moreover, UVR “is responsible for the production of vitamin D3 in the skin. Vitamin D3 is hydroxylated in the liver and kidney to produce 1,25 (OH)2 vitamin D, a hormone that regulates calcium homeostasis and bone maintenance. There has been controversy over the belief that people need to receive sunlight to maintain adequate vitamin D levels in the body. It has been suggested that current sun-avoidance practices, including the use of sunscreen products, may or will contribute to a widespread vitamin D deficiency. Evidence to support this emerges from clinical studies demonstrating that the application of sunscreen products will reduce artificial, UV-induced vitamin D in sunscreen users. However, studies examining actual vitamin D status in populations using sunscreen products have not found deficiencies in vitamin D or clinical evidence of such a deficiency. This could be because the sun is not the only source of vitamin D synthesis. Supplements can provide adequate intake, as can milk and orange juice fortified with vitamin D. The U.S. Department of Agriculture recommends 200 IU/d for children and younger adults (<50 years old), 400 IU/d for older adults (>50 years old), and 600 to 800 IU/d for the elderly (>70 years old). Eight ounces of fortified milk or orange juice contains 100 IU (2.5 g), which is also the amount of vitamin D found in approximately half a teaspoon of cod liver oil. The sun-and-vitamin-D issue has become less significant because of the fact that most foods are now enriched with vitamin D” and there are vitamin D supplements available to alleviate any deficiencies.55 Nevertheless, clothing and sunscreen usage has been shown, for the most part, to reduce UVR exposure.23

Public interventions and education
Various skin cancer task forces have proposed several important guidelines to decrease the rising skin cancer incidence.56, 57 These briefly include the following: (1) the establishment of policies that reduce exposure to UVR; (2) providing and maintaining physical and social environments, which support sun safety and are consistent with the development of other healthful habits; (3) professional pre-service and in-service skin cancer education for school administrators, teachers, physical education teachers and coaches, nurses, and others working in healthcare; (4) health services and organizations to increase skin cancer prevention education, sun-safety environments and making these policies readily available to the public; (5) lastly, the promotion of free skin cancer screening programs are also highly encouraged.56, 57

Several studies “support the notion that individuals’ beliefs about sun-risk and sun-safe behaviors have a major influence on their intentional sunbathing and sunbathing consequences.”58 Education can also be greatly influential for people during decision making. However, education should be age-appropriate and it should create awareness, knowledge, attitudes and behavioral skills that people need to prevent skin cancer. Moreover, this education should be linked to opportunities for practicing sun-safety behaviors. Primary care physicians can have larger roles in preventing skin cancer if they are trained to “recognize and educate patients at risk, as well as direct them to be followed under dermatology care.”59 Therefore, there is a need for education related to UV exposure and skin cancer risk. To address this issue, it would be beneficial to implement educational programs tailored for schools/workplaces, homes and doctors’ visits. Despite the importance of patient education by physicians, Freiman et al., determined that only 19% of selected patients received sun advice from their physicians before they were diagnosed with melanoma and 49% received advice after diagnosis. The authors go on to say that “patients with known risk factors were not preferentially targeted for advice before their diagnosis.”59 This shows how important it is for physicians and dermatologists to provide sun-related education. Patient education can include advice pertaining to sunscreen usage, reapplication methods, risk factors and tanning bed dangers. In addition to this, visual aids can be valuable in physicians’ offices as they can display the results of people after receiving a great deal of UVR.60 Naylor and Robinson mention sun-protection strategies, which physicians can utilize to promote safe sun behaviors. These include: (1) setting a date to end intentional tanning, (2) determining which past behaviors were helpful in protecting against sun exposure and trying to incorporate them (as well as other techniques) in the future, (3) making strategies to overcome obstacles and (4) involving family members so everyone would remind each other about using sun protection. These authors suggest that the techniques listed above will be beneficial if they are implemented on individual patients rather than the entire public.61

In addition to the above, it is also advisable to provide children with sun-safety education, which can also influence their caregivers.62 By encouraging and teaching youngsters about healthy sun exposure habits, one can influence them to make sound judgments as they get older. Robinson and Rademaker suggest that by educating and promoting healthy sun-protection behaviors in adults, children will be able to learn these positive behaviors and apply them in their lives. Moreover, if children practice sun-protective techniques, they will reduce their cumulative lifelong sun exposure and intense episodic sun exposure, hence reducing their risk for skin cancer (NMSCs and melanoma).63 In addition to the youth, such sun safety education programs are also vital for people at high risk of getting skin cancer.28

Besides patient education, public health campaigns, which are broadcast via the media, can also serve to teach the public.60 These messages should be concise, easily attainable and they should target specific audiences (public and healthcare professionals).62 In conclusion, by providing proper education, people will be more aware of the truths and consequences of excessive UV exposure and skin cancer. This will hopefully allow them to take preventive steps, to reduce their risk of skin cancer. Through public education, healthcare agencies/providers can increase the public’s awareness of skin cancers, their causes and preventative measures, which may be both life-changing and life-saving.56, 57 
Abstract
There is persuasive evidence that each of the three main types of skin cancer, basal cell carcinoma (BCC), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and melanoma, is caused by sun exposure. The incidence rate of each is higher in fairer skinned, sun-sensitive rather than darker skinned, less sun-sensitive people; risk increases with increasing ambient solar radiation; the highest densities are on the most sun exposed parts of the body and the lowest on the least exposed; and they are associated in individuals with total (mainly SCC), occupational (mainly SCC) and non-occupational or recreational sun exposure (mainly melanoma and BCC) and a history of sunburn and presence of benign sun damage in the skin. That UV radiation specifically causes these skin cancers depends on indirect inferences from the action spectrum of solar radiation for skin cancer from studies in animals and the action spectrum for dipyrimidine dimers and evidence that presumed causative mutations for skin cancer arise most commonly at dipyrimidine sites. Sun protection is essential if skin cancer incidence is to be reduced. The epidemiological data suggest that in implementing sun protection an increase in intermittency of exposure should be avoided, that sun protection will have the greatest impact if achieved as early as possible in life and that it will probably have an impact later in life, especially in those who had high childhood exposure to solar radiation. 
Each year, more than half a million women are diagnosed with cervical cancer and the disease results in over 300 000 deaths worldwide. High-risk subtypes of the human papilloma virus (HPV) are the cause of the disease in most cases. The disease is largely preventable. Approximately 90% of cervical cancers occur in low-income and middle-income countries that lack organised screening and HPV vaccination programmes. In high-income countries, cervical cancer incidence and mortality have more than halved over the past 30 years since the introduction of formal screening programmes. Treatment depends on disease extent at diagnosis and locally available resources, and might involve radical hysterectomy or chemoradiation, or a combination of both. Conservative, fertility-preserving surgical procedures have become standard of care for women with low-risk, early-stage disease. Advances in radiotherapy technology, such as intensity-modulated radiotherapy, have resulted in less treatment-related toxicity for women with locally-advanced disease. For women with metastatic or recurrent disease, the overall prognosis remains poor; nevertheless, the incorporation of the anti-VEGF agent bevacizumab has been able to extend overall survival beyond 12 months. Preliminary results of novel immunotherapeutic approaches, similarly to other solid tumours, have shown promising results so far.
Summary
Cervical cancer is a serious health problem, with nearly 500 000 women developing the disease each year worldwide. Most cases occur in less developed countries where no effective screening systems are available. Risk factors include exposure to human papillomavirus, smoking, and immune-system dysfunction. Most women with early-stage tumours can be cured, although long-term morbidity from treatment is common. Results of randomised clinical trials have shown that for women with locally advanced cancers, chemoradiotherapy should be regarded as the standard of care; however, the applicability of this treatment to women in less developed countries remains largely untested. Many women with localised (stage IB) tumours even now receive various combinations of surgery and radiotherapy, despite unresolved concern about the morbidity of this approach compared with definitive radiotherapy or radical surgery. Treatment of recurrent cervical cancer remains largely ineffective. Quality of life should be taken into account in treatment of women with primary and recurrent cervical cancer. 
Overview
An estimated 12,200 new cases of cervical cancer will be diagnosed in the United States in 2010, and 4200 people will die of the disease.1 Cervical cancer rates are decreasing among women in the United States, although incidence remains high among Hispanic/Latino, black, and Asian women.2–5 However, cervical cancer is a major world health problem for women. The global yearly incidence of cervical cancer for 2002 was 493,200; the annual death rate was 273,500. It is the third most common cancer in women worldwide,6,7 with 78% of cases occurring in developing countries, where cervical cancer is the second most frequent cause of cancer death in women.

Persistent human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is regarded as the most important factor contributing to the development of cervical cancer. A relationship seems to exist between the incidence of cervical cancer and the prevalence of HPV in the population. The prevalence of chronic HPV in countries with a high incidence of cervical cancer is 10% to 20%, whereas its prevalence in low-incidence countries is 5% to 10%.6 Immunization against HPV prevents infection with certain types of HPV and, thus, is expected to prevent specific HPV cancer in women (see NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology [NCCN Guidelines] for Cervical Cancer Screening, in this issue; to view the most recent version of these guidelines, visit the NCCN Web site at www.NCCN.org).8–12 Other epidemiologic risk factors associated with cervical cancer are a history of smoking, parity, contraceptive use, early age at onset of coitus, larger number of sexual partners, history of sexually transmitted disease, and chronic immunosuppression.13

Squamous cell carcinomas account for approximately 80% of all cervical cancers, and adenocarcinoma for approximately 20%. In developed countries, the substantial decline in incidence and mortality of squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix is thought to be a result of effective screening, although racial, ethnic, and geographic disparities exist.2,3,14,15 However, adenocarcinoma of the cervix has increased over the past 3 decades, probably because cervical cytologic screening methods are less effective for adenocarcinoma.16–19 Screening methods using HPV testing may increase detection of adenocarcinoma. Vaccination with HPV vaccines may also decrease the incidence of both squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma.18,20 
Diagnosis and Workup
These NCCN Guidelines discuss squamous cell carcinoma, adenosquamous carcinoma, and adenocarcinoma of the cervix. Neuroendocrine carcinoma, small cell tumors, glassy-cell carcinomas, sarcomas, and other histologic types are not within the scope of these guidelines.

Currently, the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) evaluation procedures for staging are limited to colposcopy, biopsy, conization of the cervix, cystoscopy, and proctosigmoidoscopy. More complex radiologic and surgical staging procedures are not addressed in the FIGO classification. In the United States, however, CT, MRI, combined PET-CT, and surgical staging are often used to guide treatment options and design.21–23

The earliest stages of cervical carcinoma may be asymptomatic or associated with a watery vaginal discharge and postcoital bleeding or intermittent spotting. These early symptoms frequently are unrecognized by the patient. Because of the accessibility of the uterine cervix, cervical cytology or Papanicolaou (Pap) smears and cervical biopsies can usually result in an accurate diagnosis (see NCCN Guidelines for Cervical Cancer Screening [in this issue and at www.NCCN.org]). Cone biopsy (i.e., conization) is recommended if the cervical biopsy is inadequate to define invasiveness or if accurate assessment of microinvasive disease is required. However, cervical cytologic screening methods are less useful for diagnosing adenocarcinoma, because adenocarcinoma in situ affects areas of the cervix that are harder to sample (i.e., endocervical canal).5,19

Workup for these patients with suspicious symptoms includes history and physical examination, complete blood cell count (including platelets), and liver and renal function tests. Radiologic imaging includes chest radiograph, CT or combined PET-CT, and MRI as indicated (e.g., to rule out disease high in the endocervix); however, imaging is optional for patients with stage IB1 or smaller tumors (see page 1390). Cystoscopy and proctoscopy should be reserved for patients in whom clinical concern exists for bladder or rectal extension.

Panel members discussed whether laparoscopic and robotic approaches should be included as part of these NCCN Guidelines in both staging and treatment. These techniques are being used more frequently, but long-term outcome data are not yet available. Laparoscopic staging, lymphadenectomies, and radical hysterectomies can be performed satisfactorily and are used routinely in selected patients in several NCCN Member Institutions.24–26 Data from studies overseas suggest that recurrence rates are low for laparoscopic radical hysterectomy after 3 to 6 years of follow-up.27,28 Robotic radical hysterectomy (which is another minimally invasive surgical technique) is currently being performed in patients with early-stage cervical cancer. Potential advantages associated with laparoscopic and robotic approaches include decreased hospital stay and more rapid patient recovery.29–31

Staging
Because of the variability of the availability and worldwide use of noninvasive radiographic imaging, the FIGO system limits imaging procedures to chest radiography, intravenous pyelography, and barium enema. The staging of carcinoma of the cervix remains largely a clinical evaluation. Although surgical staging is more accurate than clinical staging, surgical staging often cannot be used in low resource countries.22,32,33 The panel currently uses the 2009 FIGO definitions and staging system (see Table 1, available online, in these guidelines, at www.NCCN.org [ST-1]).32,34 This staging system from FIGO has been approved by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC).35 With the new staging, stage IIA is now subdivided into stage IIA1 (tumor size ≤ 4 cm) and stage IIA2 (tumor size > 4 cm), which is the only change from the previous 1994 FIGO staging system.

Importantly, lymphatic vascular space involvement (LVSI) does not alter the FIGO classification.32 FIGO did not include vascular space involvement, because pathologists do not always agree on whether LVSI is present in tissue samples. Some panel members believe that the presence of frank LVSI should exclude the lesion from the treatment schema for stage IA1 and that these patients should be treated using stage IB1 guidelines.

The use of MRI, CT, or combined PET-CT scans may aid in treatment planning but is not accepted for formalized staging purposes.22,33,36,37 In addition, FIGO has always maintained that staging is intended for comparison purposes only and not as a guide for therapy. As a result, the panel uses the FIGO definitions as the stratification system for these guidelines, although the findings on imaging studies (i.e., CT and MRI) are used to guide treatment options and design. MRI is useful to rule out disease high in the endocervix.

Primary Treatment
The primary treatment of early-stage cervical cancer is either surgery or radiation therapy (RT). Surgery is typically reserved for lower-stage disease and smaller lesions, such as stage IA, IB1, and selected IIA1. The panel agrees that concurrent chemoradiation is the primary treatment of choice for stages IB2 to IVA disease based on the results of 5 randomized clinical trials (see Table 2, available online, in these guidelines, at www.NCCN.org [MS-13]). Chemoradiation can also be used for patients who are not candidates for hysterectomy. Although few studies have assessed treatment specifically for adenocarcinoma, a recent analysis suggests that they can be treated effectively in a similar manner to squamous cell carcinomas.38,39

Clinical Trials and Basis for Treatment Selection
A randomized Italian study compared RT alone with radical hysterectomy and lymph node dissection.40 This study used adjuvant RT after surgery for women with surgical stage pT2b (which corresponds to FIGO stage IIB) or more extensive disease, less than 3 mm of uninvolved cervical stroma, and cut-through or positive nodes. Identical outcomes were noted for patients treated with radiation versus surgery, with (or without) postoperative radiation, but higher complication rates were noted for the combined modality approach. This study has been criticized by surgeons for its broad use of postoperative RT in the surgery arm and the high complication rate.

Concurrent chemoradiation, using cisplatin-based chemotherapy (either cisplatin alone or cisplatin/5-fluorouracil [5-FU]), is the treatment of choice for stages IB2, II, III, and IVA disease based on the results of 5 randomized clinical trials (see Table 2, available in these guidelines at www.NCCN.org [MS-13]).41–46 These 5 trials have shown that the use of concurrent chemoradiation results in a 30% to 50% decrease in the risk of death compared with RT alone. Although the optimal concurrent chemotherapy regimen to use with RT requires further investigation, these 5 trials clearly established a role for concurrent cisplatin-based chemoradiation. Based on this data, the NCI issued an alert stating that strong consideration should be given to using chemoradiation instead of RT alone for invasive cervical cancer (http://www.nih.gov/news/pr/feb99/nci-22.htm). Long-term follow-up of 3 of these trials has confirmed that concurrent cisplatin-based chemoradiation improves progression-free and overall survival when compared with RT with or without hydroxyurea.47–49 A recent meta-analysis reported that chemoradiotherapy leads to a 6% improvement in 5-year survival (hazard ratio, 0.81; P < .001).50 A large population-based registry analysis in Canada (n = 4069) confirmed that chemoradiotherapy improved outcomes when compared with radiotherapy alone.51

Although chemoradiation is tolerated, acute and long-term side effects have been reported.50,52,53 Some oncologists prefer concurrent single-agent cisplatin chemoradiation over cisplatin plus 5-FU chemoradiation, because the latter may be more toxic.54 Concurrent carboplatin or nonplatinum chemoradiation regimens are options for patients who may not tolerate cisplatin-containing chemoradiation.50,55–59 Note that when concurrent chemoradiation is used, the chemotherapy is typically given when the external-beam pelvic radiation is administered.54 The panel believes that using “systemic consolidation” (i.e., adding chemotherapy after chemoradiation) should only be used in clinical trials (e.g., RTOG 0724).50,60,61

Early-Stage Disease
After careful clinical evaluation and staging, the primary treatment of early-stage cervical cancer is either surgery or RT. The treatment schema is stratified using the FIGO staging system (see Table 1, available online, in these guidelines, at www.NCCN.org [ST-1]).

Stage IA1 Disease: Extrafascial (i.e., simple) hysterectomy is commonly recommended for patients with clinical stage IA1 disease. Another option is modified radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection if lymphovascular space invasion is present (category 2B for node dissection only). However, if the patient is medically inoperable or if fertility is desired, patients with negative margins from cone biopsy could undergo observation.62,63 For patients who desire fertility preservation, trachelectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection can be considered with (or without) para-aortic lymph node sampling for stage IA cervical cancer (see page 1391).64–67

Stage IA2 Disease: Stage IA2 tumors can be treated with radical hysterectomy or radical trachelectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection with (or without) para-aortic lymph node sampling. Para-aortic node dissection is indicated for patients with known or suspected pelvic nodal disease.

Brachytherapy with (or without) pelvic radiation (total point A dose, 75–80 Gy) is another treatment option for stage IA2 disease. These doses are recommended for most patients based on summation of conventional external-beam fractionation and low–dose-rate (40–70 cGy/h) brachytherapy equivalents. Treatment should be modified based on normal tissue tolerance or on biologic equivalence calculations when using high–dose-rate brachytherapy (see Radiation Therapy, page 1409).

Stage IB and IIA Disease: Depending on their stage and disease bulk, patients with stage IB or IIA tumors can be treated with surgery, RT, or concurrent chemoradiation. A combined PET-CT scan can be performed to rule out extrapelvic disease before deciding how to treat these patients. The surgical option includes radical hysterectomy plus bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection with or without para-aortic lymph node sampling.40 Para-aortic node dissection is indicated for patients with larger tumors and suspected or known pelvic nodal disease. Some panel members feel that a pelvic lymph node dissection should be performed first and if negative, then the radical hysterectomy should be performed. If the lymph nodes are positive, then the hysterectomy should be abandoned; these patients should undergo chemoradiation.

For patients who desire fertility preservation, radical trachelectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection with (or without) para-aortic lymph node sampling can be considered for stage IB1 tumors 2 cm or less (see page 1391).64–68 In one study, oncologic outcomes were similar after 4 years when comparing radical trachelectomy with radical hysterectomy for patients with stage IB1 cervical carcinoma.68 A study found that among women attempting to conceive after radical trachelectomy for early-stage cervical cancer, the 5-year cumulative pregnancy rate was 52.8%; the cancer recurrence rate was low, but the miscarriage rate is higher.69 For young (< 45 years) premenopausal women with early-stage squamous cell carcinoma who opt for ovarian preservation (i.e., hysterectomy only), the rate of ovarian metastases is low.70,71

Recent data suggest that sentinel lymph node biopsy may be useful for decreasing the need for pelvic lymphadenectomy in patients with early-stage cervical cancer, but panel members believe the technique is not yet sufficiently validated.72–74 However, this is an interesting area for further research.75–78

For patients with stage IB or IIA tumors (including those who are not candidates for hysterectomy), another option is combined pelvic radiotherapy and brachytherapy with or without concurrent cisplatin-containing chemotherapy (see page 1391). Although concurrent chemoradiation has been proven effective in the definitive treatment of more advanced-stage disease, this approach has not been specifically studied in patients with stage IB1 or IIA1 disease. Careful consideration of the risk/benefit ratio should be undertaken in these patients with smaller tumors.

For patients with clinical stage IB2 or IIA2 tumors who are treated with definitive radiation, concurrent cisplatin-containing chemotherapy has been shown to significantly improve patient survival.41,42 For stage IB2 or IIA2 tumors, the panel disagreed (category 3) about recommending adjuvant hysterectomy for patients undergoing primary chemoradiation.41

Advanced Disease
This category has traditionally included patients with stage IIB to IVA disease (i.e., locally advanced disease). However, many oncologists now include patients with IB2 and IIA2 disease in the advanced disease category. For patients with more advanced tumors who are undergoing primary chemoradiation, the volume of RT is critical and guided by assessment of nodal involvement in the pelvic and para-aortic nodes. Radiologic imaging studies (including PET-CT) are recommended for stage IB2 or greater disease. MRI is useful to rule out disease high in the endocervix. However, needle biopsy can be considered for questionable imaging findings. Surgical staging (i.e., extraperitoneal or laparoscopic lymph node dissection) is also an option (category 2B) for these patients. Surgical staging may also detect microscopic nodal disease that is not discernable with radiologic imaging.79

For patients without nodal disease or with disease limited to the pelvis only through surgical staging, treatment consists of pelvic RT with concurrent cisplatin-based chemotherapy and brachytherapy (category 1).42,44–46,54 However, for patients with positive para-aortic and pelvic lymph nodes by imaging, extraperitoneal lymph node dissection should be considered followed by extended-field RT, concurrent cisplatin-containing chemotherapy, and brachytherapy (see page 1395). Patients with positive para-aortic lymph nodes who are positive for distant metastases are treated with systemic chemotherapy (see page 1401) and individualized RT.

Metastatic Disease
For patients who present with distant metastatic disease (i.e., stage IVB), primary treatment is often cisplatin-based chemotherapy (see Systemic Therapy for Metastatic Disease, page 1406). In these situations, individualized RT may be considered for control of pelvic disease and all other symptoms.

Adjuvant Treatment
Adjuvant treatment is indicated after radical hysterectomy, depending on surgical findings and disease stage. Observation is appropriate for patients with stage IA2, IB1, or IIA1 disease who have negative nodes and no risk factors after radical hysterectomy. However, adjuvant treatment is indicated after radical hysterectomy if pathologic risk factors are discovered. For patients with stage IA2, IB1, or IIA1 disease who have negative lymph nodes after surgery but have large primary tumor size, deep stromal invasion, and/or LVSI, pelvic radiation is recommended (category 1) with (or without) concurrent cisplatin-based chemotherapy (category 2B for chemotherapy).80–83

Adjuvant pelvic RT alone versus no further therapy was tested in a randomized trial (Gynecologic Oncology Group [GOG] 92) of selected patients with node-negative stage IB carcinoma of the cervix after hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy.83 Patients were eligible for this trial after radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy if they had at least 2 of the following risk factors: 1) greater than one third stromal invasion; 2) capillary lymphatic space involvement; or 3) cervical tumor diameters more than 4 cm. Patients with positive lymph nodes or involved surgical margins were excluded. At 2 years, the recurrence-free rates were 88% for the RT group versus 79% for the no-further-treatment group. After long-term follow-up (12 years), an updated analysis confirmed that pelvic RT increased progression-free survival; there was also a clear trend towards improved overall survival (P = .07).84

Patients with positive pelvic nodes, positive surgical margin, and/or positive parametrium should be treated with postoperative pelvic radiation with concurrent cisplatin-containing chemotherapy (category 1)43 with (or without) vaginal brachytherapy (see page 1392). Vaginal brachytherapy may be a useful boost for patients with positive vaginal mucosal margins. The addition of concurrent chemoradiation significantly improves overall survival for high-risk patients with early-stage disease (those with positive lymph nodes, parametrial extension, and/or positive margins) who undergo radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy.43 The Intergroup trial 0107 showed a statistically significant benefit of adjuvant pelvic radiation with concurrent cisplatin and 5-FU in the treatment of patients with stage IA2, IB, or IIA disease who had positive lymph nodes, positive margins, and/or microscopic parametrial involvement found at surgery.43

If para-aortic lymph nodes are found to be positive during surgical staging, patients must undergo further screening with chest CT or combined PET-CT scan. In women who are positive for distant metastases, biopsy of suspicious areas should be considered as indicated (see page 1392). For patients without distant metastases, recommended treatment is extended-field RT (including pelvis and para-aortic lymph nodes) with concurrent cisplatin-based chemotherapy with (or without) brachytherapy. For patients with distant metastases, recommended treatment is systemic chemotherapy (see page 1401) and individualized radiotherapy.

Surveillance
Because no definitive study or uniform agreement exists on the best method for posttreatment surveillance for cervical cancer, the panel combined the practice patterns of NCCN Member Institutions and issued consensus recommendations. Patient follow-up includes interval history and physical examination, with cervical/vaginal cytology every 3 to 6 months for 2 years, every 6 months for another 3 to 5 years, and then annually (see page 1397). Some clinicians have suggested that rigorous cytology follow-up is not warranted because of studies stating that Pap smears did not detect recurrences in patients with stage I or II cervical cancer who were asymptomatic after treatment.85,86 It is important to emphasize good clinical evaluation and a high index of suspicion, because the detection rate of recurrent cervical cancer is low using cervical and vaginal cytology alone.87 Patient education regarding symptoms suggestive of recurrence is appropriate.

In patients at high risk for locoregional (central or para-aortic) failure, a combined PET-CT scan may be useful for detecting asymptomatic disease that is potentially curable.88–90 Annual chest radiographs are optional.87,91 Many other tests remain optional based on clinical indications, such as semiannual complete blood counts, blood urea nitrogen, and serum creatinine determinations (see page 1397). Patients with persistent or recurrent disease must be evaluated using additional imaging studies as clinically indicated, and surgical exploration in selected cases, followed by therapy for relapse (see next section).92

Vaginal dilators are recommended after pelvic RT, because patients who receive RT are prone to vaginal stenosis, which can impair sexual function. Women can use vaginal dilators to prevent or treat vaginal stenosis. Dilator use can start 2 to 4 weeks after RT is completed and can be used indefinitely (http://www.ukons.org/storage/dilators_guidelines.pdf).

Cervical cancer survivors are at risk for second cancers.93 Data suggest that patients who undergo radiation therapy for pelvic cancers are at risk for radiation-induced second cancers, especially at radiated sites near the cervix (e.g., colon, rectum/anus, urinary bladder); therefore, careful surveillance is appropriate for these patients.94,95

Therapy for Relapse
Locoregional Therapy
Patients with a localized recurrence of cervical cancer after initial treatment should be evaluated to determine whether radiotherapy or surgery can be used for relapse. Long-term disease-free survival rates of approximately 40% have been reported in some situations.96

For patients who experience locoregional recurrences who have not undergone previous RT or who experience recurrences outside of the previously treated RT field, therapy for relapse includes tumor-directed RT and platinum-based chemotherapy with (or without) brachytherapy; surgical resection can be considered if feasible (see page 1398). Typically, the chemoradiation for recurrence uses cisplatin as a single agent or cisplatin plus 5-FU.97,98

Patients with central pelvic recurrent disease after RT should be evaluated for pelvic exenteration, with (or without) intraoperative RT (IORT).99–105 Surgical mortality is generally 5% or lower, with survival rates approaching 50%.101 Concomitant measures with these radical procedures include adequate rehabilitation programs dealing with the psychosocial and psychosexual consequences of the operation and reconstructive procedures.100,106–108 Although exenteration is the common surgical approach in postradiation patients, radical hysterectomy or brachytherapy may be an option in carefully selected patients with small central lesions (< 2 cm).

For patients with noncentral recurrent disease, options include resection with IORT for close or positive margins, tumor-directed RT with (or without) chemotherapy, chemotherapy, best supportive care (see NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology [NCCN Guidelines] for Palliative Care; to view the most recent version of these guidelines, visit the NCCN Web site at www.NCCN.org), or participation in a clinical trial. Patients who experience recurrence after second-line definitive therapy, either surgery or RT, have a poor prognosis. They can be treated with chemotherapy or best supportive care, or be enrolled in a clinical trial.

Systemic Therapy for Metastatic Disease
Patients who develop distant metastases, either at initial presentation or at relapse, are rarely curable. For highly selected patients with isolated distant metastases, occasional long-term survival has been reported with 1) surgical resection with (or without) IORT; 2) RT with (or without) concurrent chemotherapy; or 3) chemotherapy (see page 1398). For most other patients with distant metastases, appropriate treatment is either chemotherapy (see page 1401) or best supportive care.

The palliation of pelvic recurrences in heavily irradiated sites that are not amenable to local pain control techniques or surgical resection is an unresolved clinical issue. These sites are generally not responsive to chemotherapy. Adequately palliating the complications of pain and fistulae from these recurrences is clinically challenging (http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/270646-overview). However, short courses of RT may provide symptomatic relief to patients with bone metastases, painful para-aortic nodes, or supraclavicular adenopathy.109,110

Chemotherapy has a limited role in prolonging survival or improving quality of life, and is recommended for patients with extrapelvic metastases or recurrent disease who are not candidates for RT or exenterative surgery. Patients who experience response to chemotherapy may have pain relief of a transient nature. If cisplatin was previously used as a radiosensitizer, combination platinum-based regimens are preferred over single agents in the metastatic disease setting based on several randomized phase III trials (see next section).111,112

First-Line Combination Chemotherapy: Cisplatin has been considered the most effective agent for treating metastatic cervical cancer.113 However, most patients who develop metastatic disease have received concurrent cisplatin/RT as primary treatment and may no longer be sensitive to single-agent platinum therapy.111,112 Cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy regimens, such as cisplatin/paclitaxel and cisplatin/topotecan, have been extensively investigated in clinical studies.111,112,114–116

A randomized phase III study (GOG 169) in 264 eligible patients comparing paclitaxel and cisplatin with cisplatin alone showed that patients treated with the 2-drug combination had a higher response rate (36% vs. 19%) and improved progression-free survival (4.8 vs. 2.8 months; P > .001), although no improvement was seen in median survival.111 Patients who experienced response to cisplatin/paclitaxel experienced a significant improvement in quality of life. Although carboplatin/paclitaxel has not been studied in a prospective randomized setting, many physicians use carboplatin/paclitaxel because of ease of administration and tolerability.

Another randomized phase III GOG study (GOG 179) investigated the combination of cisplatin and topotecan versus cisplatin alone in recurrent or persistent cervical cancer. In this study of 294 eligible patients, the topotecan combination regimen was shown to be superior to single-agent cisplatin in overall response rate (27% vs. 13%; P = .004), progression-free survival (4.6 vs. 2.9 months; P = .014), and median survival (9.4 vs. 6.5 months; P = .017).112 The FDA has approved cisplatin/topotecan for advanced cervical cancer. However, the cisplatin/paclitaxel or carboplatin/paclitaxel regimens are less toxic and easier to administer than cisplatin/topotecan.

A recent phase III trial (GOG 204) in 513 patients with advanced metastatic or recurrent cancer assessed 4 cisplatin-doublet regimens (cisplatin/paclitaxel, cisplatin/topotecan, cisplatin/gemcitabine, and cisplatin/vinorelbine).116 The trial was closed early, because it was apparent that cisplatin/topotecan, cisplatin/gemcitabine, and cisplatin/vinorelbine were not superior to cisplatin/paclitaxel. No significant differences in overall survival were seen; however, the trends for response rate, progression-free survival, and overall survival (12.9 vs. 10 months) suggest that cisplatin/paclitaxel is superior to the other regimens. Cisplatin/paclitaxel was associated with less thrombocytopenia and anemia (but with more nausea, vomiting, infection, and alopecia) than the other regimens. Although cisplatin/gemcitabine was not shown to be a superior regimen in GOG 204, it was tolerable. Based on a phase III randomized trial for locally advanced cervical cancer, the guidelines include cisplatin/gemcitabine as an option.61 Cisplatin/gemcitabine may be a useful regimen for patients with neuropathy who cannot tolerate other regimens.

Many clinicians prefer using carboplatin rather than cisplatin because of ease of administration, tolerability, and preservation of renal function. A retrospective trial assessing cisplatin/paclitaxel versus carboplatin/paclitaxel confirmed these opinions.117 Paclitaxel and carboplatin have been assessed for recurrent or persistent cancer of the cervix. In a study using paclitaxel and carboplatin in 25 women, the median overall survival was 21 months.118 Recently, a study using paclitaxel and carboplatin in 51 women had a median overall survival of 13 months.119 A phase III trial is currently assessing carboplatin/paclitaxel versus cisplatin/paclitaxel.120 Nonplatinum doublets are also being studied.121

Single Agents: Cisplatin is generally regarded as the most active agent and is recommended as a possible first-line single-agent chemotherapy in recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer; reported response rates are approximately 20% to 30%, with an occasional complete response.111,113,122,123 Overall survival with cisplatin is approximately 6 to 9 months. Carboplatin and paclitaxel each have been reported to be tolerable and efficacious and are also possible first-line single-agent chemotherapies.124–127 Therefore, palliation with single agents—cisplatin, carboplatin, or paclitaxel— is a reasonable approach in patients with recurrent disease not amenable to surgical or radiotherapeutic approaches. Complete responses were also observed with topotecan and paclitaxel; however, topotecan is associated with more toxicity than carboplatin and paclitaxel.

Other agents (which are category 2B unless otherwise indicated) that have shown responses or prolongation of progression-free survival and may be useful as second-line therapy include bevacizumab,128 docetaxel,129 5-FU,130 gemcitabine,131 ifosfamide,132,133 irinotecan,134 mitomycin,135 topotecan,136,137 pemetrexed (category 3),138 and vinorelbine (category 3).139

Drug Reactions: Virtually all drugs have the potential to cause adverse reactions, either during or after infusion.140 In cervical cancer treatment, drugs that more commonly cause adverse reactions include carboplatin, cisplatin, docetaxel, liposomal doxorubicin, and paclitaxel. Most of these drug reactions are mild infusion reactions (e.g., skin reactions, cardiovascular reactions, respiratory or throat tightness), but more severe allergic reactions (e.g., life-threatening anaphylaxis) can occur.141,142 In addition, patients can have severe infusion reactions and mild allergic reactions. Infusion reactions are more common with paclitaxel.143 Allergic reactions (i.e., true drug allergies) are more common with platinum agents (e.g., carboplatin, cisplatin).143,144

Management of drug reactions is discussed in the NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines) for Ovarian Cancer (see page OV-C, available online, in these guidelines, at www.NCCN.org).143 Importantly, patients who have experienced severe life-threatening reactions should not receive the implicated agent again. If a mild allergic reaction previously occurred and it is appropriate to administer the drug again, a desensitization regimen should be used even if the symptoms have resolved. Various desensitization regimens have been published and should be followed.144–146 Patients must be desensitized with each infusion if they experienced a previous reaction. Almost all patients can be desensitized.140 To maximize safety, patients should be desensitized in the intensive care unit.140

Other Agents: Vaccine therapies currently have no established role in the treatment of cervical cancer, except in the setting of a clinical trial.147–149 Targeted therapy (using small molecules or monoclonal antibodies) is currently utilized in clinical trials.60,128,150,151

Best Supportive Care: Patients with refractory systemic cancer warrant a comprehensive coordinated approach involving hospice care, pain consultants, and emotional and spiritual support, individualized to the situation (see NCCN Guidelines for Palliative Care; to view the most recent version of these guidelines, visit the NCCN Web site at www.NCCN.org).

Incidental Cervical Cancer
Invasive cervical carcinoma is sometimes found incidentally after extrafascial hysterectomy. Workup for these patients includes history and physical examination, complete blood cell count (including platelets), and liver and renal function tests. Radiologic imaging includes chest radiography, CT or combined PET-CT, or MRI as indicated (e.g., to rule out disease high in the endocervix), although imaging is optional for patients with stage IB1 or smaller tumors (see page 1396).

No definitive data exist regarding the appropriate primary treatment of these patients. The panel believes that a reasonable treatment schema for patients with either stage IA1 with LVSI or with stage IA2 or higher tumors (pathologic findings) should be based on the status of the surgical margins. If margins are positive and imaging is negative for nodal disease, then pelvic RT with concurrent cisplatin-containing chemotherapy with or without individualized brachytherapy should be recommended (see page 1396). Patients with stage IA1 disease with no LVSI should undergo surveillance.

If margins or imaging is negative in stage IA2 or greater tumors, options include pelvic RT with (or without) concurrent cisplatin-containing chemotherapy and brachytherapy; or a complete parametrectomy, upper vaginectomy, and pelvic lymph node dissection with (or without) para-aortic lymph node sampling. Patients with negative lymph nodes should be observed or treated with optional pelvic radiation with (or without) vaginal brachytherapy if they have high-risk factors (i.e., large primary tumor, deep stromal invasion, and/or LVSI; see page 1396).83 Concurrent cisplatin-based chemoradiation is recommended for gross residual disease, positive imaging, disease in the lymph nodes and/or parametrium, and/or a positive surgical margin; individualized brachytherapy is clearly indicated for a positive vaginal margin.

Radiation Therapy
RT is often used in the management of patients with cervical cancer, either for those with intact cervical cancer who are not amenable to surgery (e.g., definitive therapy for those with locally advanced disease or those who are poor operative candidates) or after radical hysterectomy (i.e., adjuvant RT) in those who have one or more pathologic risk factors (e.g., positive lymph nodes, parametrial infiltration, positive surgical margins, large tumor size, deep stromal invasion, lymphovascular space invasion).

The algorithm provides general RT dosage recommendations, which are expanded in the Principles of Radiation Therapy section (see pages 1399 and 1400). These RT dosages should not be interpreted as standalone recommendations, because RT techniques and clinical judgment are essential parts in developing an appropriate treatment regimen.

Optimum staging of patients to precisely delineate the primary tumor volume and draining lymph nodes, including abdominopelvic radiologic studies (CT, MRI, or combined PET-CT scans), is recommended in patients with stage IB2, IIA2, or advanced-stage tumors. Contemporary imaging studies must be correlated with careful assessment of clinical findings to define tumor extent, especially regarding vaginal or parametrial extension.

Radiation Treatment Planning
Technologic advances in imaging, computer treatment planning systems, and linear accelerator technology have enabled the more precise delivery of radiation dose to the pelvis. However, physical accuracy of dose delivery must be matched to a clear understanding of tumor extent, potential pathways of spread, and historical patterns of locoregional recurrence to avoid geographic misses.

CT-based treatment planning with conformal blocking and dosimetry is considered standard care for external-beam radiotherapy. Brachytherapy is a critical component of therapy in patients with intact cervical cancer and is typically combined with external-beam radiation in an integrated treatment plan.

For patients with locally advanced cancers, initial radiation treatment of 40 to 45 Gy to the whole pelvis is often necessary to obtain tumor shrinkage to permit optimal intracavitary placements. With low–dose-rate intracavitary systems, total doses from brachytherapy and external-beam radiation to point A of at least 80 Gy are currently recommended for small tumors, with doses of 85 Gy or higher recommended for larger tumors.

For lesions in the lower one third of the vagina, the inguinal lymph nodes must be treated. The use of extended-field radiation to treat occult or macroscopic para-aortic lymph node disease must be carefully planned to ensure an adequate dose is delivered (45 Gy for microscopic disease) without exceeding bowel, spinal cord, or renal tolerances.152 General recommendations for radiation volumes and doses are discussed in the algorithm (see pages 1399 and 1400).

Intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) is becoming more widely available; however, issues regarding target definition, patient and target immobilization, tissue deformation, and reproducibility remain to be validated.153–157 The role of IMRT in cervical cancer continues to be evaluated in several prospective multicenter clinical trials.

Several retrospective analyses suggest that prolonged treatment duration has an adverse effect on outcome.158–162 Extending the overall treatment beyond 6 to 8 weeks can result in approximately a 0.5% to 1% decrease in pelvic control and cause-specific survival for each extra day of overall treatment time. Thus, although no prospective randomized trials have been performed, it is generally accepted that the entire RT course (including both external-beam and brachytherapy components) should be completed in a timely fashion (within 8 weeks); delays or splits in the treatment should be avoided whenever possible.

Normal Tissue Considerations
Planning for RT in cervical cancer must take into account the potential impact on surrounding critical structures, such as rectum, bladder, sigmoid, small bowel, and bone. Acute effects (i.e., diarrhea, bladder irritation, fatigue) occur to some degree in most patients undergoing radiation and are typically magnified by concurrent chemotherapy. However, acute effects can often be managed with medications and supportive care, and they generally resolve soon after completion of radiation.

The risk of more significant late effects (e.g., obstruction, fibrosis/necrosis, fistula) is related to the volume, total dose, dose per fraction, and specific intrinsic radiosensitivity of the normal tissue irradiated.152 Careful blocking to minimize normal tissue exposure while not compromising tumor coverage is critical to achieving optimal outcomes. In addition, patient-related conditions (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease, collagen-vascular disease, multiple abdominal/pelvic surgeries, history of pelvic inflammatory disease, diabetes) influence determination of radiation dose and volumes.

For most patients, it is generally accepted that the whole pelvis can tolerate an external-beam radiation dose of 40 to 50 Gy. Gross disease in the parametria or unresected nodes may undergo tightly contoured external beam boosts to 60 to 65 Gy. Intracavitary brachytherapy boosts require attention to proper placement of the applicators within the uterus and against the cervix and vaginal apex, and appropriate packing to maximally displace the bladder and rectum.

Pregnancy and Cervical Cancer
In pregnant women, cervical cancer is the most frequently diagnosed type of cancer; however, most pregnant women with cervical cancer have stage I disease.163 Invasive cervical cancer during pregnancy creates a clinical dilemma. Women must make the difficult decision to either delay treatment until documented fetal maturity or undergo immediate treatment based on their stage of disease. Women who delay treatment until fetal maturity should have their children delivered by cesarean section. For women diagnosed with cervical cancer during pregnancy who wish to continue their pregnancies, delaying cancer treatment until the fetus has matured has been reported.163

Patients with early-stage disease may prefer to have radical hysterectomy and node dissection instead of RT to avoid radiation fibrosis and preserve their ovaries. Patients with early-stage disease who delay treatment until fetal maturity can undergo cesarean section with radical hysterectomy and pelvic node dissection. For those choosing RT, traditional RT with (or without) chemotherapy protocols (described previously) may need to be modified.163 Vaginal radical trachelectomy has been successfully performed in a few pregnant patients with early-stage cervical cancer.164–167

Summary
Cervical cancer is decreasing in the United States because of the wide use of screening; however, it is increasing in developing countries (∼ 270,000 deaths per year), because screening is not available to many women. Effective treatment for cervical cancer (including surgery and concurrent chemoradiation) can yield cures in 80% of women with early-stage disease (stages I–II) and in 60% of women with stage III disease. The hope is that immunization against HPV (using the new vaccines) will prevent persistent infection with certain types of the virus, and will therefore prevent specific HPV cancer in women.11,12,168
Abstract
Cervical cancer is one of the most common neoplastic diseases affecting women, with a combined worldwide incidence of almost half a million new cases annually, second only to breast cancer. Basic and epidemiologic research conducted during the past 15–20 years have provided overwhelming evidence for an etiologic role for infection with certain types of sexually-transmitted human papillomavirus (HPV) as the primary cause of cervical cancer. The relative risks of cervical cancer following HPV infection as ascertained in case-control and cohort studies are among the highest in cancer epidemiology. The available evidence indicates that the HPV-cervical cancer association satisfies all relevant causal criteria for public health action. Other cervical cancer risk factors, such as smoking, parity, use of oral contraceptives, diet, other infections, and host susceptibility traits must be understood in the context of mediation of acquisition of HPV infection or in influencing events of the natural history of cervical neoplasia that occur following the establishment of a persistent HPV infection. Virtually all cervical carcinoma specimens contain HPV DNA, which suggests that HPV infection is a necessary cause of cervical neoplasia. This is the first instance in which a necessary cause has been demonstrated in cancer epidemiology—a realization that has obvious implications for primary and secondary prevention of this neoplastic disease. 
Abstract
Cervical cancer is the fourth most common malignancy diagnosed in women worldwide. Nearly all cases of cervical cancer result from infection with the human papillomavirus, and the prevention of cervical cancer includes screening and vaccination. Primary treatment options for patients with cervical cancer may include surgery or a concurrent chemoradiotherapy regimen consisting of cisplatin-based chemotherapy with external beam radiotherapy and brachytherapy. Cervical cancer causes more than one quarter of a million deaths per year as a result of grossly deficient treatments in many developing countries. This warrants a concerted global effort to counter the shocking loss of life and suffering that largely goes unreported. This article provides a review of the biology, prevention, and treatment of cervical cancer, and discusses the global cervical cancer crisis and efforts to improve the prevention and treatment of the disease in underdeveloped countries. Cancer 2017;123:2404–12. © 2017 American Cancer Society.

INTRODUCTION
Cervical cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer death among women.1 Worldwide, cervical cancer is the fourth most frequently occurring malignancy in women, and results in an estimated 530,000 new cases annually with 270,000 deaths. Approximately 85% of the worldwide deaths from cervical cancer occur in underdeveloped or developing countries, and the death rate is 18 times higher in low-income and middle-income countries compared with wealthier countries.2 The highest incidence rates occur in Central and South America, the Caribbean, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Southern Asia.3 In the United States in 2016, there were an estimated 12,990 cases and 4120 deaths from cervical cancer,4 and the median age at the time of diagnosis is 47 years.

The standard management of patients with early-stage (FIGO stage IA-IB1) cervical cancer is radical hysterectomy and lymph node dissection and/or radiation with or without chemotherapy.5-7 The standard management of individuals with locally advanced cervical cancer includes external beam radiotherapy with concurrent cisplatin-based chemotherapy with brachytherapy.8-16 Brachytherapy is critical for curative-intent treatment of cervical cancer, and when it is replaced with external beam radiotherapy, the results are clearly inferior.17-20 With state-of-the-art staging and treatment, the 3-year local control rate for patients with early-stage and advanced stage cervical cancer is 87% to 95% and 74% to 85%, respectively.15, 16 For all stages combined, the 3-year to 5-year survival rate from cervical cancer for many underdeveloped countries is <50%.21 Death from cervical cancer often involves local disease progression, resulting in significant suffering, including ureteral obstruction, pain, and fistulas. The purpose of this article was to thoroughly review the biology, prevention strategies, treatment, and activism regarding cervical cancer, with an emphasis on the global impact of these complex issues.

Biology of Cervical Cancer
The cervix is lined by stratified squamous epithelium that covers the exocervix and mucus-secreting columnar epithelium characteristic of the endocervical canal. The transition between these 2 populations of cells is called the squamocolumnar junction, and it is this area that is believed to be at greatest risk of viral neoplastic transformation. Tumors arising in the ectocervix are most often squamous cell carcinomas, which account for approximately 75% of invasive cervical carcinoma cases. In contrast, tumors arising from the endocervix are more likely to be adenocarcinomas. Adenosquamous, small cell or neuroendocrine, serous papillary, and clear cell carcinomas of the cervix are less common histological subtypes.

The majority of cases of cervical cancer result from infection with the human papillomavirus (HPV), with HPV DNA identified in approximately 95% of malignant cervical lesions.22 The majority of HPV infections are transient and will be cleared spontaneously. However, in some cases, persistent infection will result in the development of the premalignant conditions of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or adenocarcinoma in situ. Without treatment, the transition from dysplasia to invasive carcinoma may take years to decades to develop in most women. However, in approximately 10% of patients, this transition can occur in <1 year.23 In addition, adenocarcinoma in situ appears to be more difficult to detect on Papanicolaou testing, and this is thought to be one of the reasons for the increasing incidence of this subtype of cervical cancer.24

Various factors have been suggested to increase the likelihood of the development of persistent infection and subsequent malignant transformation, including cigarette smoking, long-term oral contraceptive use, high parity, and coinfection with type 2 herpes simplex virus or the human immunodeficiency virus. HPV serotypes 16 and 18 are reported to account for approximately 70% of cases, with the most common serotypes of HPV in women with cervical cancer, in descending order of frequency, being 16, 18, 45, 31, 33, 52, 58, and 35.22, 25

Perhaps due to the relative rarity of locally advanced or metastatic cervical cancer in the developed world, to our knowledge there have been only a few published reports of profiling of cervical tumors to search for actionable driver mutations. The most common finding has been of abnormalities in the phosphatidylinositide 3-kinases (PI3K) pathway, as reported by Wright et al,26 who used the OncoMap platform (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Mass) to examine 80 cervical tumors for 1250 mutations in 139 genes. They identified PIK3CA mutations in 31% of cases, with shorter survival times observed in those patients with a mutation.26 However, targeting this pathway therapeutically has proven difficult. Wright et al also identified KRAS mutations in 17.5% of the adenocarcinomas but none of the squamous cell carcinomas, suggesting that these tumor subtypes will need different kinds of targeted therapies. Ojesina et al27 recently published the findings of deep sequencing of 115 cervical cancers to search for somatic mutations. They identified several novel somatic mutations in the squamous cell carcinomas profiled, including E322K substitutions in the MAPK1 gene (8%); inactivating mutations in the HLA-B gene (9%); and mutations in EP300 (16%), FBXW7 (15%), TP53 (5%), and ERBB2 (6%). Somatic mutations in ELF3 (13%) and CBFB (8%) were found in 24 adenocarcinomas.27

Prevention of Cervical Cancer
Recognition that cervical neoplasia begins as an intraepithelial change, which usually takes many years to develop into invasive disease, led to the use of cervical exfoliative cytology to detect cervical intraepithelial neoplasia that can be treated to prevent the development of cervical cancer. With the discovery that cervical cancer is caused by high-risk HPV infection and the development of prophylactic vaccination in the 1990s, there now is the means with which to achieve a more global approach to prevention through prophylactic vaccination. Vaccination can be viewed as primary prevention, with screening as secondary prevention.

The pivotal role of HPV in cervical carcinogenesis means that screening with HPV testing can achieve a more accurate risk-based approach. Randomized trials28-31 have demonstrated that HPV testing is more sensitive than cytology, and that for HPV-negative women, screening intervals can be safely extended.32 HPV testing lacks specificity, which means that cytology is required to triage women for referral to colposcopy. Based on limited data, triage of high-risk HPV (hrHPV)-positive women using a combination of genotyping for HPV types 16 and 18 and reflex cytology for women who are positive for the 12 other hrHPV genotypes appears to be a reasonable approach to managing patients who are hrHPV positive.33 A challenge for primary HPV screening is the management of women with negative cytology, but various risk-based strategies are being developed based on HPV type and persistence. Screening programs around the world currently are in the process of switching from primary cytology aided by visual inspection with acetic acid to primary HPV testing.

Prophylactic Vaccination Against HPV
HPV infection of the cervix, believed to occur in the majority of women at some time in their life, is most prevalent after the onset of sexual activity. In the majority of cases, the infection is cleared by the immune system. However, in a significant minority of individuals, infection is persistent and the viral genome becomes integrated into host DNA, resulting in genomic dysregulation caused largely by the HPV oncogenes E6 and E7. The concept behind prophylactic vaccination is to achieve a high level of type-specific neutralizing antibodies directed against HPV that are capable of preventing cervical infection. The critical discovery that led to the vaccines we have today is that the major capsid protein of HPV, L1, could self-assemble into so-called virus-like particles,34 which were shown to be highly immunogenic. Two vaccines, both based on virus-like particles made from HPV types 16 and 18, were produced, with each using a different adjuvant. One was bivalent (types 16 and 18) and the other vaccine was quadrivalent to include the types responsible for genital warts (types 6 and 11). Both these vaccines have been rigorously tested, initially in phase 1 and phase 2 trials and then in pivotal phase 3 trials.35, 36 These trials were performed among patient cohorts aged 15 to 26 years, and they demonstrated very high levels of type-specific antibody, which achieved very high efficacy (>95%) in preventing HPV infection and similar efficacy in preventing type-specific cervical intraepithelial neoplasia as well as vaginal and vulvar lesions. However, the data from these trials demonstrated that the vaccines were ineffective in females who already had an established HPV infection. In addition, the vaccination of boys before sexual activity at ages 11 to 12 years is recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics to prevent HPV-induced cancers of the oropharynx, anus, and penis.37 Vaccination of both sexes will have a large impact on herd immunity.

Most developed countries have introduced vaccination programs for prepubescent girls, and there has been early evidence of a public health benefit with a reduction in the incidence of high-risk infection, a reduced incidence of cervical abnormalities, and even a reduction in genital warts in males who have not been vaccinated. This provides clear evidence of herd protection achieved by vaccination.

Recent Developments in Prophylactic Vaccination
The original vaccination regimens were based on 3 doses, given at time 0, 2 months, and 6 months. Recently, 2 doses have been shown to be as effective as 3 doses,38 provided the second dose is given 6 months to 12 months after the initial dose. For example, in the United Kingdom, a 2-dose regimen has replaced the 3-dose regimen in the publicly funded schools-based program, which is achieving coverage rates of 85% to 90%. Another development has been the production of a nonavalent vaccine that adds types 31, 33, 45, 52, and 58 to the vaccine containing types 6, 11, 16, and 18. This vaccine has been demonstrated in phase 3 trials to achieve similar efficacy against types 6, 11, 16, and 18 in addition to achieving high efficacy against the new types.39, 40 The nonavalent vaccine has been licensed in some countries, including the United States and the United Kingdom,41, 42 and may well replace the bivalent and quadrivalent vaccines over the next few years.43, 44 Prophylactic vaccination has the means to save hundreds of thousands of lives, but this will require the political will to ensure that vaccination is implemented in resource-poor countries.

There also is increasing interest and research into the possibility of treating established cervical cancer using immunotherapy approaches. The 2 main oncogenes associated with HPV-driven cancers, E6 and E7, are considered to be excellent targets for immunotherapy. Promising results have been observed with clinical trials involving therapeutic HPV vaccines, adoptive T-cell therapy, and checkpoint inhibitors, with currently ongoing trials examining various combination immunotherapy approaches with standard treatments such as radiotherapy.45

Gynecological Cancer Intergroup and the Cervix Cancer Research Network
The Gynecologic Cancer InterGroup (GCIG), formalized in 1997, aims to promote and facilitate high-quality clinical trials to improve outcomes for women with gynecological cancer. Currently, there are 29 member groups, including representation from North America, Europe, Asia, and Australia. The GCIG has several standing committees including the Ovarian Cancer, Endometrial Cancer, Cervix Cancer, Translational Research, Harmonization (operations and statistics), Rare Tumors, Symptom Benefit, Phase 2, and Membership committees.

The GCIG also has developed a Cervix Cancer Research Network (CCRN) whose aim is to promote high-quality clinical research for cancer of the cervix diagnosed in women in developing countries. The purpose of the CCRN is to bring research in cervical cancer to the countries where the burden is the highest and there is a lack of GCIG cooperative groups (Fig. 1).46 Interested sites complete a prequalifying set of capability questions followed by a radiologic/physics check (questionnaire courtesy of IROC, Houston, Tex). Site visits then are performed by a review team from GCIG to assess clinical activity, site resources, clinical trial operations, radiotherapy facilities/quality assurance and treatment record, and clinical trials management information. Participation in a beam measurement program (thermoluminescence dosimeters/optically stimulated luminescence dosimeters) every 2 years is a requirement. Ongoing quality assurance and quality control is performed according to the lead group trial protocols. CCRN currently has 4 active cervical cancer trials, as described below.  
Countries around the world have many Gynecological Cancer InterGroup (GCIG) members or are interested in joining the GCIG or the Cervix Cancer Research Network (CCRN). Reproduced with permission from Gaffney DK, Suneja G, Ryu SY, et al. The Cervix Cancer Research Network: a global outreach effort on behalf of the Gynecologic Cancer InterGroup. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;92:506-508.46
The success of the GCIG relates to pooled intellectual resources and collaboration, rapid and large accrual, evidence-based medicine and application of the results, and the opportunity for substantial translational research. GCIG is unique in the world of cancer research and has been intensively productive in collaborative trials, intellectual exchanges and learning, brainstorming, and consensus conferences.

Modern Treatment of Cervical Cancer
The treatment of cervical cancer is dictated by International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) stage, which is a clinical staging system.47 For patients with early cervical cancers, surgery is recommended. A cone biopsy is adequate treatment for patients with stage IA1 disease, whereas for patients with stage IA1 disease with lymphovascular space invasion or stage IA2 disease, a cone biopsy with negative surgical margins and pelvic lymph node dissection are recommended. Fertility-sparing surgery is an option for patients with early-stage cervical cancers. For patients with high-risk stage IA1 through stage IB1 disease, a radical trachelectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection can be considered. An additional option for some patients would be pelvic radiotherapy and brachytherapy. There currently are ongoing trials evaluating reduced-intensity surgery for patients with early-stage lesions. The Simple Hysterectomy And Pelvic node dissection in Early cervix cancer (SHAPE) trial is evaluating simple versus radical hysterectomy for patients with cervical tumors measuring <2 cm in size. SHAPE is a CCRN trial that has immediate application to underresourced countries. A randomized trial of surgery versus radiotherapy for patients with stage IB1 to stage IIA cervical cancer demonstrated no difference in survival.5 It is interesting to note that patients in this trial did not receive chemotherapy, and 84% of patients in the surgical arm with tumors measuring >4 cm required postoperative radiotherapy. Morbidity was noted to be greater in patients who received both modalities, and therefore current recommendations are to try to use a single modality.

Advanced imaging such as computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and positron emission tomography are not permissible in FIGO staging; however, imaging (if available) should be used to appropriately guide treatment. Positron emission tomography scans are helpful for delineating the extent of disease. Magnetic resonance imaging is superior at demonstrating soft tissue resolution for the extent of cervical cancer within the pelvis. This can be critical for brachytherapy treatment planning or conformal radiotherapy techniques.

A National Cancer Institute Alert in 1999 demonstrated the superiority of cisplatin-containing concurrent chemoradiotherapy for women with advanced cervical cancer. The hazard rate for reduction and death was approximately 0.52.11 Consequently, this technique was rapidly adopted worldwide, and weekly cisplatin became the worldwide standard.48 The optimization of chemotherapy is unclear, and the CCRN has 3 trials testing the optimal combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy.49 Extended adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with locally advanced disease currently is being tested in the OUTBACK (A Phase III trial of adjuvant chemotherapy following chemoradiation as primary treatment for locally advanced cervical cancer compared to chemoradiation alone) trial. The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 0724 trial also is evaluating extended adjuvant chemotherapy for patients treated with a radical hysterectomy who have positive lymph nodes or positive parametria, although this currently is not a CCRN trial. Dose-intense neoadjuvant chemotherapy is being tested in the phase 3 INTERLACE (A phase III multicentre trial of weekly induction chemotherapy followed by standard chemoradiation versus standard chemoradiation alone in patients with locally advanced cervical cancer) trial. In addition, a phase 2 trial showed promising results with a higher dose of cisplatin administered every 3 weeks.50 This finding now is being compared with weekly cisplatin in the Tri-weekly Administration of Cisplatin in LOcally Advanced Cervical Cancer (TACO) trial. The TACO trial has been the most successful CCRN trial, with significant accrual from Vietnam and Thailand.

In patients with advanced disease who are receiving curative radiotherapy, an important quality metric is to keep the total treatment course duration within 8 weeks. In multiple studies, prolonged treatment after 8 weeks has been shown to have an approximate 1% loss in local control for every day of treatment beyond 8 weeks. Adherence to a few quality metrics such as receipt of concurrent chemoradiotherapy, brachytherapy, and completion of treatment within 8 weeks will markedly improve survival worldwide.

Brachytherapy
Brachytherapy is an integral component of the treatment of patients with advanced cervical cancer and is the standard of care in combination with external beam radiotherapy in all-national guidelines.51-53 The advantage of brachytherapy comes from its dosimetric benefits, including the ability to deliver a locally high and conformal dose to the site of disease with a rapid dose fall-off, thereby sparing adjacent structures such as the bladder, rectum, sigmoid, and small bowel.54 Brachytherapy remains unavailable in many countries. Even in countries in which brachytherapy is easily accessible, its use is declining.55-65 An analysis of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database found a decline in the use of brachytherapy from 83% in 1988 to 58% in 2009 (P<.001), although brachytherapy was found to be independently associated with better cause-specific survival (hazard ratio, 0.64; 95% confidence interval, 0.57-0.71) and overall survival (hazard ratio, 0.66; 95% confidence interval, 0.60-0.74).54 A similar study of the National Cancer Data Base found brachytherapy use decreased from 97% in 2004 to 86% in 2011.65, 66 In one of these studies, the impact of the use of brachytherapy was greater than that noted for the use of concurrent chemotherapy.65 Brachytherapy is a complex procedure that necessitates significant resources and infrastructure, which is particularly challenging in resource-limited countries. Only 20 of the 52 African countries had brachytherapy in 2010.54, 66 Of 12 centers in Latin America, 3 do not perform gynecological brachytherapy.54

One high-dose rate brachytherapy machine can treat approximately 10 to 12 patients per day. In Ethiopia, a country of 94.1 million individuals with 60,000 new cancer cases each year, there is 1 afterloader for the entire country. In Thailand, in 1 hospital, a total of 1000 brachytherapy procedures are performed in 1 year by 1 afterloader. In Honduras, where 1000 new cases of cervical cancer are diagnosed annually, there is no brachytherapy facility in the entire country. Increasing the worldwide availability of brachytherapy should be a global health priority.

Treatment of Cervical Cancer in the Developing World
The majority of patients with cervical cancer in the developing world present with an advanced stage of disease, with limited access to adequate treatment. As a result, the mortality rates are high for these women (Fig. 2).67 Because of the unpredictable availability of resources, the guidelines that are used to treat patients with cervical cancer in high-income countries are not applicable to many of the developing countries. 
Two resource-stratified guidelines were recently published by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) and the American Society of Clinical Oncology.47 The NCCN guidelines provided evidence-based recommendations by the representatives from NCCN member institutions. The American Society of Clinical Oncology established a process including mixed methods of guideline development, adaptation of the clinical practice guidelines of other organizations, and formal consensus by the international expert panels. Recommendations were made regarding the management of patients with cervical cancer based on 4 different resource stratifications (Table 1).68 Included in Table 1 are the 4 resource settings, which included a basic setting, in which bare essential services are available to provide gynecologic cancer care. The other 3 settings-limited, enhanced, and maximal-offer additional capacities that are essential in providing care and improving survival for patients with cervical cancer. Both guidelines stressed that the highest level of care be provided to women whenever available.
A Global Call to Action
It is no exaggeration to state that cancer represents an imminent and severe crisis for developing countries, with cervical cancer as the one of the most prevalent. A resounding call to action for this crisis is building; advocates are needed to save lives. For example, a recent report from the Lancet Oncology presented a body of evidence that quantifies the worldwide shortage of radiotherapy services by country. By scaling up radiotherapy departments in lower-income and middle-income countries, we could potentially observe >26.9 million life-years saved in these countries over the lifetime of the patients who received treatment.69

A global call to action against cancer in low-income and middle-income countries is desperately needed.70 Although there are organizations attempting to make a difference,71, 72 much needs to be accomplished to stem this global crisis. A total of 740 women die each day of cervical cancer. The majority of these deaths occur among relatively young women, and the deaths result in unmeasurable pain and suffering. The World Health Organization has made safer motherhood a priority,73 and now the same urgency needs to be directed toward cervical cancer. Vaccination programs are important, but we cannot ignore women who already are infected with HPV. We, and others, implore the global women's health movement to make the treatment of cervical cancer a priority.74

Conclusions/Summary
Cervical cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer death among women,1 representing the fourth most common malignancy diagnosed in women worldwide.3 To tackle this complex problem, there needs to be action taken on multiple fronts, including primary and secondary prevention, improvements in treatment, and access to care. The treatment of cervical cancer is a global health crisis that needs to be a call to action for the world health community. The GCIG through the CCRN is bringing relevant and important trials to low-income and middle-income countries. Our hope is that new attention can be brought to cervical cancer, especially among governmental and philanthropic agencies.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
William Small Jr has acted as a paid member of the Speakers Bureau for Zeiss and as a member of the Advisory Board for Varian for work performed outside of the current study.
A Global Call to Action
It is no exaggeration to state that cancer represents an imminent and severe crisis for developing countries, with cervical cancer as the one of the most prevalent. A resounding call to action for this crisis is building; advocates are needed to save lives. For example, a recent report from the Lancet Oncology presented a body of evidence that quantifies the worldwide shortage of radiotherapy services by country. By scaling up radiotherapy departments in lower-income and middle-income countries, we could potentially observe >26.9 million life-years saved in these countries over the lifetime of the patients who received treatment.69

A global call to action against cancer in low-income and middle-income countries is desperately needed.70 Although there are organizations attempting to make a difference,71, 72 much needs to be accomplished to stem this global crisis. A total of 740 women die each day of cervical cancer. The majority of these deaths occur among relatively young women, and the deaths result in unmeasurable pain and suffering. The World Health Organization has made safer motherhood a priority,73 and now the same urgency needs to be directed toward cervical cancer. Vaccination programs are important, but we cannot ignore women who already are infected with HPV. We, and others, implore the global women's health movement to make the treatment of cervical cancer a priority.74

Conclusions/Summary
Cervical cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer death among women,1 representing the fourth most common malignancy diagnosed in women worldwide.3 To tackle this complex problem, there needs to be action taken on multiple fronts, including primary and secondary prevention, improvements in treatment, and access to care. The treatment of cervical cancer is a global health crisis that needs to be a call to action for the world health community. The GCIG through the CCRN is bringing relevant and important trials to low-income and middle-income countries. Our hope is that new attention can be brought to cervical cancer, especially among governmental and philanthropic agencies.

FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
William Small Jr has acted as a paid member of the Speakers Bureau for Zeiss and as a member of the Advisory Board for Varian for work performed outside of the current study.  
Bladder cancer is a complex disease associated with high morbidity and mortality rates if not treated optimally. Awareness of haematuria as the major presenting symptom is paramount, and early diagnosis with individualised treatment and follow-up is the key to a successful outcome. For non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer, the mainstay of treatment is complete resection of the tumour followed by induction and maintenance immunotherapy with intravesical BCG vaccine or intravesical chemotherapy. For muscle-invasive bladder cancer, multimodal treatment involving radical cystectomy with neoadjuvant chemotherapy offers the best chance for cure. Selected patients with muscle-invasive tumours can be offered bladder-sparing trimodality treatment consisting of transurethral resection with chemoradiation. Advanced disease is best treated with systemic cisplatin-based chemotherapy; immunotherapy is emerging as a viable salvage treatment for patients in whom first-line chemotherapy cannot control the disease. Developments in the past 2 years have shed light on genetic subtypes of bladder cancer that might differ from one another in response to various treatments.  
Overview
An estimated 73,510 new cases of urinary bladder cancer will be diagnosed in the United States (55,600 men and 17,910 women) in 2012.1 Bladder cancer, the fourth most common cancer, is 3 times more common in men than in women in the United States. During the same period, approximately 14,880 deaths (10,510 men and 4370 women) will result from bladder cancer. Bladder cancers are rarely diagnosed in individuals younger than 40 years. Because the median age of diagnosis is 65 years, medical comorbidities are a frequent consideration in patient management.

The clinical spectrum of bladder cancer can be divided into 3 categories that differ in prognosis, management, and therapeutic goals. The first category consists of non–muscle-invasive tumors, for which treatment is directed at reducing recurrences and preventing progression to a more advanced stage. The second group encompasses the muscle-invasive lesions, and the goal of therapy is to determine whether the bladder should be removed or can be preserved without compromising survival, and to determine whether the primary lesion can be managed independently or whether patients are at high risk for distant spread, requiring systemic approaches to improve the likelihood of cure. The critical concern of therapy for the third group, consisting of metastatic lesions, is how to prolong quantity and quality of life. Numerous agents with different mechanisms of action have antitumor effects in this disease. The issue has become how to use these agents to achieve the best possible outcome.

Histology
More than 90% of urothelial tumors originate in the urinary bladder, 8% originate in the renal pelvis, and the remaining 2% originate in the ureter and urethra. Urothelial (transitional cell) carcinomas, the most common histologic subtype in the United States, may develop anywhere transitional epithelium is present, from the renal pelvis to the ureter, bladder, and proximal two-thirds of the urethra. The distal third of the urethra is dominated by squamous epithelium. The diagnosis of squamous cell tumors, which constitute 3% of the urinary tumors diagnosed in the United States, requires the presence of keratinization in the pathologic specimen.2

Of the other histologic subtypes, 1.4% are adenocarcinomas and 1.0% are small cell tumors (with) 
or without an associated paraneoplastic syndrome). Adenocarcinomas often occur in the dome of the bladder in the embryonal remnant of the urachus, in the periurethral tissues, or with a “signet ring” cell histology. Urothelial tumors often have a mixture of divergent histologic subtypes, such as urothelial (transitional cell) and squamous, adenocarcinoma, and more recently appreciated nested micropapillary and sarcomatoid subtypes.3 These should be treated as urothelial carcinomas.
The systemic chemotherapy regimens used to treat urothelial carcinomas (transitional cell tumors) are generally ineffective for tumors with pure nonurothelial (non–transitional cell) histology, such as adenocarcinoma or squamous carcinoma. In some cases with a mixed histology, only the nonurothelial component remains after systemic treatment.

Clinical Presentation and Workup
The most common presenting symptom in patients with bladder cancer is microscopic or gross hematuria, although urinary frequency from irritation or a reduced bladder capacity can also develop. Less commonly, a urinary tract infection is the presenting symptom, whereas upper tract obstruction or pain may occur in a more advanced lesion. Patients presenting with these symptoms should be evaluated using office cystoscopy to determine whether a lesion is present. If one is documented, the patient should be scheduled for a transurethral resection of the bladder tumor (TURBT) to confirm the diagnosis and determine the extent of disease within the bladder. Urine cytology may also be obtained around the time of cystoscopy.

If the cystoscopic appearance of the tumor is solid (sessile) or high grade, or suggests invasion into muscle, a CT scan or MRI of the abdomen and pelvis is recommended before the TURBT. Because the results of a CT scan rarely alter the management of tumors with a purely papillary appearance or when only the mucosa appears to be abnormal, suggesting carcinoma in situ (CIS), a CT scan or other upper tract imaging can be deferred until after surgery. Additional workup for all patients should include urine cytology if not already tested and evaluation of the upper tracts with an intravenous pyelogram, renal ultrasound with retrograde pyelogram, CT urography, ureteroscopy, or MRI urogram. CT urography is generally the preferred approach to upper tract imaging in patients who can safely receive intravenous contrast agents.

TURBT with a bimanual examination under anesthesia (EUA) is performed to resect visible tumor and to sample muscle within the area of the tumor to assess whether invasion has occurred. When a large papillary lesion is noted, more than one session may be needed to completely resect the tumor. With CIS, biopsy of sites adjacent to the tumor and multiple random biopsies may be performed to assess for a field change. A transurethral resection (TUR) biopsy of the prostate may also be considered. Finally, if an invasive tumor is noted, an adequate sample of muscle must be obtained. A small fragment of tumor with few muscle fibers is inadequate for assessing the depth of invasion and guiding treatment recommendations.

Additional diagnostic tests, such as a bone scan, should be performed if elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase are seen in the blood. Treatment decisions are then based on disease extent within the 3 general categories: non–muscle-invasive, muscle-invasive, or metastatic. Chest imaging is indicated if invasive disease is suspected.

Positive urinary cytology may indicate urothelial tumor anywhere in the urinary tract. In the presence of a positive cytology and a normal cystoscopy, the upper tracts and the prostate in men must be evaluated and ureteroscopy may be considered.

Management of bladder cancer is based on the pathologic findings of the biopsy specimen, with attention to histology, grade, and depth of invasion. These factors are used to estimate the probability of recurrence and progression to a more advanced stage. Consideration may be given to FDA-approved urinary biomarker testing using fluorescence in situ hybridization or nuclear matrix protein 22 in the monitoring for recurrence.4,5

Pathology and Natural History
Approximately 70% of newly detected cases are non–muscle-invasive disease: exophytic papillary tumors confined largely to the mucosa (Ta; 70%) or, less often, to the submucosa (T1; 25%), or flat high-grade lesions (CIS, 5%).6 These tumors tend to be friable and have a high propensity for bleeding. Their natural history is characterized by a tendency to recur in the same portion or another part of the bladder, and these recurrences can be either at the same stage as the initial tumor or at a more advanced stage.

Papillary tumors confined to the mucosa or submucosa are generally managed endoscopically with complete resection. Progression to a more advanced stage may result in local symptoms or, less commonly, symptoms related to metastatic disease.

An estimated 31% to 78% of patients with a tumor confined to the mucosa or submucosa will experience a recurrence or new occurrence of urothelial (transitional cell) carcinoma within 5 years.7 These probabilities of recurrence vary as a function of the initial stage and grade, size, and multiplicity. Refining these estimates for individual patients is an area of active research.

Staging and Grading
The most commonly used staging system is the TNM staging system8 by the AJCC, as shown in the algorithm (available online, in these guidelines, at NCCN.org [ST-1]).

Tumor grade has been recognized as an important prognostic indicator with regard to the potential for disease recurrence and progression. The most widely used classification for grading of non–muscle-invasive urothelial neoplasms has been the 1973 WHO classification. This system has designations for papilloma and grades 1, 2, and 3 carcinomas. In 2004, members of the WHO and International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP) published and recommended a revised consensus classification for papillary neoplasms.9 A new category of papillary urothelial neoplasm of low malignant potential was created to describe lesions with an increased number of urothelial layers when compared with papilloma, but without cytologic features of malignancy. According to the WHO 2004 system, some grade 2 lesions are classified as low-grade tumors, and others as high-grade. This new system potentially allows for enhanced prognostic significance but depends on the pathologist to make these distinctions. The 2004 WHO classification is yet to be validated by clinical trials; therefore, tumors are graded using both the 1973 and 2004 WHO classifications. The different classification systems are compared in Table 1 (“Principles of Pathology Management: Malignancy Grading of Bladder Carcinoma: Old and New Systems,” available online, in these guidelines, at NCCN. org [MS-21]). The 7th edition of the AJCC staging system has replaced the previous 4 grade system to match the current WHO/ISUP recommended grading system.8

After stage and grade have been determined, treatment decisions are based on the depth of invasion and extent of disease.

Non–Muscle-Invasive Disease
Workup and Primary Surgical Treatment
A physical examination usually does not reveal non–muscle-invasive disease. Non–muscle-invasive tumors are divided into noninvasive papillomas or carcinomas (Ta), tumors invading the lamina propria (T1), and CIS or Tis. These tumors were previously referred to as superficial, which is an imprecise term that should be avoided. In some cases, a papillary or T1 lesion will be documented as having an associated in situ component (Tis).

Noninvasive disease may be diagnosed using initial cystoscopy and cytology. Once suspected, imaging of upper tract collecting systems is required. In addition, a pelvic CT scan must be performed before TURBT if sessile or high-grade disease is suspected.

Standard treatment for Ta, T1, and Tis is TURBT.10 It is used to diagnose, stage, and treat visible tumors. TURBT with a bimanual EUA is performed to resect visible tumor and to sample muscle within the area of the tumor to assess whether invasion has occurred. The involvement of the prostatic urethra and ducts in male patients with Ta, T1, and Tis bladder tumors has been reported. The risk is higher in the case of tumors in the bladder neck. Therefore, if the lesion is sessile or if Tis or high-grade disease is suspected, selected mapping biopsies and TUR biopsy of prostate must be considered.

Clinical investigation of the specimen obtained by TUR or other biopsies is an important step in the diagnosis and subsequent management of bladder cancer. The modifier “c” before the stage refers to clinical staging based on bimanual EUA and endoscopic surgery (biopsy or TUR) and imaging studies. A modifier “p” would refer to pathologic staging based on cystectomy and lymph node dissection.

A second TUR is performed when a high-grade T1 tumor and possibly a Ta has been detected at the initial TUR. This is especially critical when no muscularis propria was included in the resection.11 However, depending on the depth of invasion and grade, intravesical therapy may be recommended. This suggestion is based on the estimated probability of recurrence (ie, new tumor formation within the bladder) and progression to a more advanced, usually muscle-invasive stage, which are events that should be considered independently. Cystectomy is rarely considered for a Ta, low-grade lesion.

Intravesical Therapy
Intravesical therapy is used in 2 general settings: as prophylactic or adjuvant therapy after a complete endoscopic resection or, rarely, as therapy with the goal of eradicating residual disease that could not be completely resected. This distinction is important, because most published data reflect prophylactic or adjuvant use with the goal of preventing recurrence or delaying progression to a higher grade or stage. In many cases, intravesical therapy may be overused if given to patients who have a low probability of recurrence or progression. Bacillus CalmetteGuérin (BCG) has been shown to be effective as prophylaxis in preventing bladder cancer recurrences after TURBT. Management of the different histologic subtypes of noninvasive bladder tumors of different grades is outlined in subsequent sections.

cTa, Low-Grade Tumors
TUR is the standard treatment for cTa, low-grade tumors. Although a complete TUR by itself can eradicate cTa, low-grade tumors, these tumors have a relatively high risk for recurrence. Therefore, after TUR, the panel recommends that, in addition to observation, clinicians consider administering a single dose of immediate intravesicular chemotherapy (not immunotherapy) within 24 hours of resection. A meta-analysis of 7 randomized trials confirmed that immediate intravesical therapy decreased the risk of recurrence by 11% (from 48% to 37%) in patients with either single or multiple tumors.12 Later studies had mixed results, with 2 reporting a decrease in recurrence and 1 finding no advantage.13–15 The immediate intravesical chemotherapy may be followed by a 6-week induction of intravesical chemotherapy. Mitomycin C is the agent most commonly used. Immunotherapy is not recommended in these patients.

The need for adjuvant therapy depends on patient prognosis. If the patient has a low risk of recurrence, a single immediate intravesical treatment may be sufficient. Factors to consider include the size, number, T category, and grade of the tumors; concomitant CIS; and prior recurrence.7 Meta-analyses have confirmed the efficacy of adjuvant intravesical chemotherapy in reducing the risk of recurrence.16,17 Immediate intravesical treatment should be avoided if TURBT was extensive or bladder perforation is suspected.

Close followup of all patients is needed, although the risk for progression to a more advanced stage is low. As a result, these patients are advised to undergo a cystoscopy at 3 months initially, and then at increasing intervals thereafter.

cTa, High-Grade Tumors
Tumors staged as cTa, high-grade lesions are papillary tumors with a relatively high risk for recurrence and progression toward more invasiveness. Restaging TUR detected residual disease in 27% of patients with Ta tumors when muscle was present in the original TUR.18 In the absence of muscularis propria in the initial TUR specimen, 49% of patients with superficial disease will be understaged, versus 14% if muscle was present.11 Repeat resection is recommended in patients with incomplete resection, or should be strongly considered if the specimen contains no muscle.

After TUR, in addition to observation, patients with Ta, high-grade tumors may be treated with intravesical BCG or mitomycin C. In the literature, 4 meta-analyses confirm that BCG after TUR is superior to TUR alone or TUR and chemotherapy in preventing recurrences of high-grade Ta and T1 tumors.19–22 The NCCN Bladder Cancer Panel recommends BCG as the preferred option over mitomycin for adjuvant treatment of high-grade lesions. Observation is also an option.

Follow-up is recommended, with a urinary cytology and cystoscopy at 3- to 6-month intervals for the first 2 years, and at increasing intervals as appropriate thereafter. Imaging of the upper tract should be considered every 1 to 2 years for high-grade tumors. Urine molecular tests for urothelial tumor markers are now available.23 Most of these tests have a better sensitivity for detecting bladder cancer than urinary cytology, but specificity is lower. However, whether these tests offer additional information that is useful for detection and management of non–muscle-invasive bladder tumors remains unclear. Therefore, the panel considers this a category 2B recommendation.

cT1 Tumors
T1 tumors are those that invade subepithelial connective tissue (also referred to as lamina propria). Based on the histologic differentiation, most cT1 lesions are high-grade and considered to be potentially dangerous, with a higher risk for recurrence and progression. These tumors may occur as solitary lesions or as multifocal tumors with or without an associated in situ component.

These are also treated with a complete endoscopic resection. In patients with high-risk disease, especially if the complete resection is uncertain because of the tumor size and location, no muscle is shown in the specimen, lymphovascular invasion has occurred, or inadequate staging is suspected, repeat TURBT is strongly advised.24 This is supported by a trial that prospectively randomized 142 patients with pT1 tumors to either a second TURBT within 2 to 6 weeks of the initial TURBT or no repeat TURBT.25 All patients received adjuvant intravesical therapy. Although overall survival was similar, the 3-year recurrence-free survival rate was significantly higher in the repeat TURBT arm versus the control arm (69% vs 37%, respectively), especially among patients with high-grade tumors.

Within the category of T1 disease, a particularly high-risk stratum can be identified: multifocal lesions, tumors associated with vascular invasion, or lesions that recur after BCG treatment. Data suggest that early cystectomy may be preferred if residual disease is found, because of the high risk for progression to a more advanced stage.26 Therefore, for high-risk tumors, cystectomy rather than repeat TURBT is recommended.

If residual disease is found after a second resection, immunotherapy with BCG (category 1 recommendation) or cystectomy is recommended. If no residual disease is found after the second resection, intravesical therapy with BCG (preferred; category 1 recommendation) or mitomycin C is recommended. Follow-up is similar to that for high-grade Ta disease.

Tis
Primary CIS or Tis is a high-grade lesion that is believed to be a precursor of invasive bladder cancer. Standard therapy for this lesion is resection followed by intravesical therapy with BCG. This therapy is generally given once a week for 6 weeks, followed by a rest period of 4 to 6 weeks, with a full reevaluation at week 12 (ie, 3 months) after the start of therapy. If the patient is unable to tolerate BCG, intravesical mitomycin C may be administered. Follow-up is similar to that for cT1 and cTa (high-grade) tumors.

Posttreatment Recurrent or Persistent cTa, cT1, and Tis Disease
Based on Cystoscopy Results: Patients who were under observation after initial TURBT, who show a documented recurrence based on positive cystoscopy results, should undergo another TURBT followed by adjuvant intravesical therapy based on the stage and grade of the recurrent lesion, and then followed up at 3-month intervals.

Recurrence After Intravesical Treatment: Patients with recurrent/persistent tumors that responded to induction intravesical therapy, after initial intravesical treatment and 12-week (3-month) evaluation, can be given a second induction course of BCG or mitomycin C induction therapy. No more than 2 consecutive induction courses should be given. If a second course of BCG is given and residual disease is seen at the second 12-week (3-month) follow-up, TURBT is performed. For patients who have Tis or cTa disease after TURBT, intravesical therapy with a different intravesical agent is an alternative to cystectomy. Valrubicin has been approved for CIS that is refractory to BCG, although panelists disagree on its value.27 For patients with recurrence of high-grade cT1 disease after TURBT and induction BCG, cystectomy is the main option.28 However, nonsurgical candidates might consider concurrent chemoradiation within the context of a clinical trial.

For patients showing no residual disease at the follow-up cystoscopy, whether 1 or 2 courses of induction therapy were administered, maintenance therapy with BCG is optional. This recommendation is based on findings that an induction course of intravesical therapy followed by a maintenance regimen produced better outcomes than intravesical chemotherapy.19,20,29–32 Malmstrom et al33 performed a meta-analysis including 9 trials in 2820 patients with non–muscle-invasive bladder cancer. They report that mitomycin C is superior to BCG without maintenance in preventing recurrence, but inferior to BCG in trials with maintenance. The optimal maintenance schedule has not been established, but patients commonly receive it for at least a year (some patients cannot tolerate the therapy beyond 2 years). Although a few NCCN Member Institutions do not routinely administer maintenance BCG, panelists agree that it should be an option.

Based on Cytology Results: In patients without a documented recurrence but with positive cytology results and negative cystoscopy and imaging results, TUR must be performed with directed or selected mapping biopsies, including TUR biopsies of the prostate. In addition, cytology of the upper tract must be evaluated and ureteroscopy may be considered for detecting tumors of the upper tract.

If the results of the selected mapping biopsy of the bladder are positive, then the recommendation is to administer intravesical BCG treatment followed by maintenance BCG (optional) if a complete response is seen. For tumors that fail to respond to BCG or show an incomplete response, the subsequent management options include cystectomy, changing the intravesical agent, or participation in a clinical trial. Further investigation and validation of results is warranted to establish the efficacy of alternative agents in secondline treatments.

If results of TUR biopsy of the prostate are positive, the treatment is described in “Urothelial (Transitional Cell) Carcinomas of the Prostate” on page MS-19, or online, in these guidelines at NCCN.org. If results of cytology of the upper tract and/or ureteroscopy results are positive, then the treatment is described in “Upper Genitourinary Tract Tumors” on page MS-17, or online, in these guidelines at NCCN.org.

If results of TUR biopsies of the bladder and prostate are negative, then follow-up at 3-month intervals is recommended, and maintenance therapy with BCG is optional. If results of cytology of the upper tract and uteroscopy are negative, follow-up at 3-month intervals is recommended.

Muscle-Invasive Disease
Workup and Primary Surgical Treatment
Before any treatment is advised, several workup procedures are recommended to accurately determine the clinical staging. Laboratory studies, such as complete blood cell count and chemistry profile, including alkaline phosphatase, must be performed, and the patient should be assessed for the presence of regional or distant metastases. This evaluation should include a cystoscopy, chest radiograph or CT scan, bone scan in patients with symptoms or elevated alkaline phosphatase, and imaging of the upper tracts with a CT or MRI scan of the abdomen and pelvis. Imaging studies help assess the extent of local tumor invasion and the spread to lymph nodes and other distant organs.34 CT and MRI may be used to assess local invasion. Unfortunately, CT scans, ultrasound, and MRI cannot accurately predict the true depth of invasion.

TURBT is the initial treatment for all muscle-invasive disease. The goal of the TUR is to correctly identify the stage; therefore, bladder muscle must be included in the resection biopsies. The overwhelming majority of muscle-invasive tumors are high-grade urothelial carcinomas.

Further treatment after initial TURBT is required for muscle-invasive tumors. Different treatment modalities are discussed later, including radical cystectomy, partial cystectomy, neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapy, bladder-preserving approaches, and chemotherapy for advanced disease.

Radical Cystectomy
The appropriate surgical procedure involves a cystoprostatectomy in men and a cystectomy and commonly a hysterectomy in women, followed by the formation of a urinary diversion. Forms of urinary diversion include an ileal conduit or directing urine to an internal urinary reservoir, with drainage to the abdominal wall or the urethra. Relative contraindications to urethral drainage include Tis in the prostatic ducts or positive urethral margin. Orthotopic diversion or a neobladder provides bladder function similar to that of a native bladder, with some increased risk for nighttime incontinence or urinary retention requiring intermittent self-catheterization.

Unfortunately, the accuracy of the staging cystoscopy and TURBT is modest, with understaging encountered frequently. A pelvic lymph node dissection (PLND) is considered an integral part of the surgical management of bladder cancer. A more extensive PLND, which may include the common iliac or even lower para-aortic or paracaval nodes, yields more nodes to be examined, increases yield of positive nodes, and is associated with better survival and a lower pelvic recurrence rate.35–39 Patient factors that may preclude a PLND include severe scarring secondary to previous treatments or surgery, advanced age, or severe comorbidities.

Partial Cystectomy
In fewer than approximately 5% of cases, an initial invasive tumor develops in an area of the bladder where an adequate margin of soft tissue and a minimum of 2 cm of noninvolved urothelium can be removed along with the tumor without compromising continence or significantly reducing bladder capacity. Partial cystectomy is most frequently recommended for lesions that develop on the dome of the bladder and have no associated Tis in other areas of the urothelium. Relative contraindications to this procedure are lesions that occur in the trigone or bladder neck. The requirement for a ureteral reimplantation, however, is not an absolute contraindication.

Similar to radical cystectomy, partial cystectomy begins with a laparotomy (intraperitoneal) and resection of the pelvic lymph nodes. If the intraoperative findings preclude a partial cystectomy, a radical cystectomy is performed. The decision to recommend adjuvant radiation or chemotherapy is based on the pathologic stage (ie, positive nodes or perivesical tissue involvement), similar to that for patients who undergo a radical cystectomy.

Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy
Increasing data support the role of neoadjuvant chemotherapy before cystectomy for T2 and T3 lesions.40–42 Two randomized trials showed a survival benefit with neoadjuvant chemotherapy, particularly in patients with clinical T3 disease (palpable mass during EUA or unequivocal mass on CT).40,41 Grossman et al40 randomized 307 patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer to radical cystectomy alone or 3 cycles of methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (MVAC) followed by radical cystectomy. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy increased median survival (77 vs 46 months; P=.06) and lowered the rate of residual disease (15% vs. 38%; P <.001), with no apparent increase in treatment-related morbidity or mortality. In a meta-analysis of 11 trials involving 3005 patients, platinum-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy was associated with improved 5-year overall and disease-free survival rates (5% and 9% absolute improvement, respectively).43

An international, multicenter, randomized trial (BA06 30894) investigated the effectiveness of neoadjuvant cisplatin, methotrexate, and vinblastine (CMV) in 976 patients.44 At a median follow-up of 8 years, patients receiving CMV before surgery had a 16% reduction in mortality risk (hazard ratio, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.72–0.99; P=.037).

Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Data conflict regarding the role of adjuvant systemic chemotherapy in invasive bladder cancer, because no randomized comparisons of adequate sample size have definitively shown a survival benefit of this therapy.45 Many trials showing a survival benefit were not randomized, raising the question of selection bias in the analysis of outcomes. A meta-analysis of 6 trials found a 25% mortality reduction with adjuvant chemotherapy, but the authors pointed out several limitations of the data and concluded that evidence is insufficient for treatment decisions.46 Studies showed a survival advantage from therapy with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (CAP) and with MVAC or methotrexate, vinblastine, epirubicin, and cisplatin (MVEC).47–49 However, methodologic issues have raised questions as to the applicability of these studies to all patients with urothelial tumors. In the MVEC trial, patients who experienced relapse in the control arm did not undergo chemotherapy, which is not typical of more contemporary series. A randomized phase III study in 194 patients reported no difference in overall or disease-free survival between patients receiving adjuvant gemcitabine and cisplatin (GC) and those receiving chemotherapy at relapse.50

Although evidence for adjuvant therapy is not as strong as for neoadjuvant therapy, current data suggest that adjuvant chemotherapy may delay recurrences, which may justify the administration of chemotherapy in those at a high risk for relapse.51 A minimum of 3 cycles of a cisplatin-based combination, such as MVAC, or more commonly now GC, may be used in patients undergoing adjuvant therapy. Regimen and dosing recommendations are mainly based on studies in advanced disease. Carboplatin should not be substituted for cisplatin in the perioperative setting. No data support the use of adjuvant chemotherapy for nonurothelial carcinomas, regardless of stage.

Patients with tumors that are pathologic stage T2 or less and have no nodal involvement or lymphovascular invasion are considered to have lower risk and do not necessarily require adjuvant chemotherapy. Some groups suggest stratifying patients based on the p53 status of the tumor, because tumors with more than 20% of positive cells seem to have a higher risk for systemic relapse. Determining the p53 status of the tumor is still considered an experimental procedure and is not part of routine management.

Adjuvant Radiation
Data on radiation or chemoradiation after cystectomy are scarce, and further prospective studies are needed to evaluate their efficacy and potential toxicity. One older randomized study of 236 patients with pT3a to pT4a bladder cancer showed improvement in 5-year disease-free survival and local control compared with surgery alone.52 A retrospective series from Milan similarly showed improved cancer-specific survival with adjuvant radiotherapy for patients with pT2–T4a disease.53 Because local recurrence rates are high for some patients after cystectomy (32% for patients with pT3–T4 disease and 68% for patients with positive surgical margins),37 adjuvant radiation therapy is reasonable to consider in these patients. Radiotherapy to 40 to 45 Gy, with or without concurrent cisplatin, could be used. The safety of higher doses, especially in the setting of a neobladder, must be further studied. Because patients with pT3a to pT4a disease are also at high risk of developing metastatic disease, they are also treated with first-line multidrug chemotherapy if their renal function is adequate for cisplatin. Radiation and multidrug chemotherapy should not be given concurrently.

Bladder-Preserving Options
Within the categories of T2 and T3a urothelial carcinomas, selected patients may be considered for bladder-preserving approaches.54 Options include aggressive endoscopic TUR alone, TUR followed by chemotherapy alone, radiotherapy alone, or a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Partial cystectomy, also a form of bladder preservation, was discussed earlier. No uniform consensus has been reached about the applicability of these approaches to the management of T2 tumors.

Bladder-preserving approaches are reasonable alternatives to cystectomy for patients who are medically unfit for surgery and those seeking an alternative to radical cystectomy. It is also endorsed by the International Consultation on Urologic Diseases-European Association of Urology evidence-based guidelines.55 There is an apparent underuse of aggressive bladder-preserving therapies for noncystectomy candidates, especially the elderly and racial minorities.56 Between 23% and 50% of patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer who are 65 years of age and older receive no treatment or non-aggressive therapy.

The decision to use a bladder-preserving approach is partially based on the location of the lesion, depth of invasion, size of the tumor, status of the “uninvolved” urothelium, and status of the patient (eg, bladder capacity, bladder function, comorbidities). Patients who are medically fit for radical cystectomy but with hydronephrosis are poor candidates for bladder-sparing procedures.57,58 Patients for whom a bladder-sparing approach is considered should undergo as complete a TUR of the tumor as possible, EUA, and metastatic workup before therapy is initiated.

With any of the alternatives to cystectomy, a concern exists over the ability to determine with certainty which bladders that appear to be endoscopically free of tumor (T0), based on a clinical assessment that includes a repeat TURBT, are in fact pathologically free of tumor (pT0). Up to one-third of bladders believed to be free of disease preoperatively after chemotherapy can have residual disease at cystectomy.59 On the other hand, one series reported that all patients who experienced a complete response after radiotherapy with concurrent cisplatin and 5-FU also had no pathologic residual disease on immediate cystectomy.60 The frequency of residual disease after cytotoxic agents (either radiation or chemotherapy) is lower for patients who present with T2 disease than with T3 disease, which must be considered when proposing a bladder-sparing approach. When possible, bladder-sparing options should be chosen in the context of clinical trials. After maximal TUR, close cystoscopic observation alone, chemotherapy alone, radiotherapy alone, or chemotherapy combined with radiotherapy (all also followed by close cystoscopic observation and further treatment, if necessary) are all potential treatment options. However, only chemotherapy combined with radiotherapy has been formally evaluated in prospective randomized comparisons61,62; the others are still considered investigational.

All bladder-sparing approaches are based on the principle that not all cases require an immediate cystectomy and that the decision to remove the bladder can be deferred until the response to therapy is assessed. When chemotherapy combined with radiotherapy is used, a cystoscopy with bladder biopsy is commonly performed midway through treatment (after the induction phase of treatment). If disease is seen, immediate cystectomy is recommended. For all of the other methods, repeat biopsy or TUR is performed 2 to 3 months after full-dose cytotoxic therapy (either chemotherapy alone or radiation alone). If persistent disease is observed, a prompt salvage cystectomy is recommended when possible.

TUR Alone: TUR alone may be curative in selected cases in which the lesion is solitary, is smaller than 2 cm, and has minimally invaded the muscle. These cases should also have no associated in situ component, palpable mass, or associated hydronephrosis.63

If considered for TURBT alone, patients should undergo an aggressive reresection of the site within 4 weeks of the primary procedure to ensure that no residual disease is present. If the repeat TURBT is negative for residual tumor, the patient can be managed conservatively with repeat endoscopic evaluations and cytologies every 3 months until a relapse is documented. At that point, management would depend on the stage of the lesion documented at relapse.

Chemotherapy After TUR: The use of chemotherapy alone is not considered to be adequate without additional treatment to the bladder, and it remains investigational. This view is based on studies showing that the proportions of complete pathologic response in the bladder using neoadjuvant chemotherapy alone were only up to 38%.40 A higher proportion of bladders can be rendered tumor-free and therefore preserved when chemotherapy is combined with concurrent radiotherapy.

Chemotherapy Followed by Partial Cystectomy: Fewer than 5% of invasive tumors present initially in a location and pattern that is amenable to curative resection with partial cystectomy.64 Nonrandomized studies reported 5- to 10-year overall survival rates of 69% to 73%; however, the rate of invasive recurrence was 23% to 33%.59,65 This approach is currently not widely used, but it has the advantages of surgically removing the diseased portion of the bladder and allowing for definitive lymph node staging.

Radiotherapy After TUR: Radiotherapy alone is inferior to radiotherapy combined with chemotherapy for patients with an invasive bladder tumor, and it is not considered standard for patients who can tolerate combined therapy.61,62 In a randomized trial of 360 patients, radiotherapy with concurrent mitomycin C and 5-FU improved the 2-year locoregional disease-free survival rate from 54% (radiotherapy alone) to 67% (P=.01), and the 5-year overall survival rate from 35% to 48% (P=.16), without increasing grade 3/4 acute or late toxicity.62 Hence, radiotherapy alone is only indicated for patients who cannot tolerate a cystectomy or chemotherapy because of medical comorbidities.

Radiotherapy With Concurrent Chemotherapy After TUR: Several groups have investigated the combination of concurrent or sequential chemotherapy and radiotherapy after TURBT. First, an endoscopic resection that is as complete as possible is performed. Incomplete resection is an unfavorable prognostic factor for the ability to preserve the bladder and for survival.66,67

RTOG protocol 8903 compared concurrent cisplatin and radiotherapy with versus without 2 cycles of induction MCV (methotrexate, cisplatin, and vinblastine) chemotherapy.58 No difference in complete clinical response or 5-year overall survival was observed between the treatment arms. Other studies also reported no significant survival benefit for neoadjuvant chemotherapy before bladder-preserving chemotherapy with radiotherapy.67,68

Radiotherapy with concurrent cisplatin-based chemotherapy as a radiosensitizer is the most common and well-studied chemoradiation method used to treat muscle-invasive bladder cancer.54,57,58,60–62,66,67 After a complete TURBT, 40 Gy of external beam radiotherapy is administered, typically with a 4-field technique. Two doses of concurrent cisplatin are given on weeks 1 and 4. After this induction phase, an endoscopic reevaluation is performed. If residual disease is noted, a cystectomy is advised. If no disease is visible and the cytology and biopsy are negative (T0), an additional 25 Gy of consolidation external-beam radiotherapy is administered along with one additional dose of cisplatin. The patient is then followed up with serial urine cytologies and cystoscopies, as previously outlined.

Results from several prospective trials have shown the effectiveness of this approach. In RTOG 89-03, in which 123 patients with clinical stage T2–T4a were treated with radiotherapy with concurrent cisplatin, with or without induction MCV chemotherapy, the 5-year overall survival rate was approximately 49% in both arms.58 In RTOG 95-06, in which 34 patients were treated with twice-daily irradiation and concurrent cisplatin and 5-FU, the 3-year overall survival rate was 83%.69 In RTOG 97-06, in which 47 patients were treated with twice-daily irradiation and concurrent cisplatin and patients also received adjuvant chemotherapy with methotrexate, vinblastine, and cisplatin,70 the 3-year overall survival rate was 61%. In RTOG 99-06, in which 80 patients were treated using twice-daily irradiation plus cisplatin and paclitaxel followed by adjuvant cisplatin and gemcitabine, the 5-year overall survival was 56%.71 In these trials, the complete response rate ranged from 59% to 81%. Whether twice-daily radiotherapy results in better outcomes than daily treatment or whether adding taxol or 5-FU improves radiosensitization over cisplatin alone, is unclear.

Up to approximately 80% of long-term survivors maintain an intact bladder, whereas other patients ultimately require radical cystectomy.57,58,66–71 A combined analysis of survivors from these 4 trials, with median follow-up of 5.4 years, showed that combined-modality therapy was associated with low rates of late grade 3 toxicity (5.7% genitourinary and 1.9% gastrointestinal).72 No late grade 4 toxicities or treatment-related deaths were recorded.

Chemotherapy for Advanced Disease
The specific chemotherapy regimen recommended partially depends on the presence or absence of medical comorbidities, such as cardiac disease and renal dysfunction, along with the risk classification of the patient based on disease extent. In general, long-term survival with combination chemotherapy alone has been reported only in good-risk patients, defined as those with good performance status, no visceral (ie, liver, lung) or bone disease, and normal alkaline phosphatase or lactic dehydrogenase levels. Poor-risk patients, defined as those with poor performance status or visceral disease, have consistently shown very poor tolerance to multiagent combination programs and few complete remissions, which are prerequisites for cure.

Currently, 3 drug types are active in the management of advanced bladder cancer: cisplatin, the taxanes, and gemcitabine. Combinations of 2 or 3 of these agents have shown clinical benefit (Table 2, “Combination Chemotherapy Regimens,” available online, in these guidelines, at NCCN.org [MS-22]). Commonly used combinations include GC73,74 and dose-dense MVAC.75,76 A large, international, phase III study randomized 405 patients with locally advanced or metastatic disease to either GC or standard MVAC.77 At a median follow-up of 19 months, overall survival and time to progression were similar in the arms. However, less-toxic deaths were recorded among patients receiving GC compared with MVAC (1% vs 3%), although this did not reach statistical significance. A 5-year update analysis confirmed that GC was not inferior to MVAC in terms of survival (overall survival, 13.0% vs 15.3%; progression-free survival, 9.8% vs 11.3%, respectively).74 Another large, randomized, phase III trial compared dose-dense MVAC versus standard MVAC.75,76 At a median follow-up of 7.3 years, 24.6% of patients were alive in the dose-dense MVAC cohort compared with 13.2% in the standard MVAC cohort; one toxic death occurred in each arm, but less overall toxicity was seen in the dose-dense group. Based on these data, standard MVAC is inferior to high-dose-intensity MVAC in terms of toxicity and efficacy, and is inferior to GC in terms of toxicity (and therefore no longer used). Both GC and dose-dense MVAC are category 1 recommendations for metastatic disease.

The performance status of the patient is a major determinant of which regimen is used, and regimens with lower toxicity profiles are recommended in patients with compromised liver or renal status or serious comorbid conditions. In patients with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of less than 60 mL/min, carboplatin may be substituted for cisplatin in the regimen mentioned earlier. A phase II/III study assessed 2 carboplatin-containing regimens in medically unfit patients (performance status 2).78 The overall response rate was 42% for gemcitabine plus carboplatin and 30% for methotrexate, carboplatin, and vinblastine. However, the response rates dropped to 26% and 20%, respectively, with increased toxicity among patients who were both unfit and had renal impairment (GFR, <60 mL/min).

More recently, the taxanes have been shown to be active as both frontline and palliative therapies. Based on these results, several groups are exploring 2- and 3-drug combinations using these agents, with and without cisplatin, as initial therapy. The alternative regimens, including cisplatin/paclitaxel,79 gemcitabine/paclitaxel,80 cisplatin/gemcitabine/paclitaxel,81 carboplatin/gemcitabine/paclitaxel,82 and cisplatin/gemcitabine/docetaxel,83 have shown modest activity in bladder cancer in phase I and II trials. A randomized phase III trial was conducted to compare GC and GC plus paclitaxel in 626 patients with locally advanced or metastatic urothelial cancer.84 The addition of paclitaxel to GC resulted in higher response rates and a borderline overall survival advantage, which was not statistically significant in the intent-to-treat analysis. Analysis of eligible patients only (92%) resulted in a small (3.2 months) statistically significant survival advantage in favor of the 3-drug regimen (P =.03). No difference in progression-free survival was seen. The incidence of neutropenic fever was substantially higher with the 3-drug combination (13.2 vs 4.3%; P <.001). Panelists feel that the risk of adding paclitaxel outweighs the limited benefit reported from the trial.

Although current data are insufficient to recommend these alternative regimens as routine first-line options, non–cisplatin-containing regimens may be considered in patients who cannot tolerate cisplatin because of renal impairment or other comorbidities (category 2B). The panel recommends enrollment in clinical trials of potentially less toxic therapies.

The regimens effective for urothelial carcinoma histologies have limited efficacy for patients with nonurothelial carcinomas. These individuals are often treated based on the identified histology. For example, adenocarcinomas are managed surgically with radical or segmental cystectomy, individualizing the adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy for maximum benefit. Pure squamous cell tumors are treated with cystectomy, radiation therapy, or agents commonly used for squamous cell carcinoma of other sites, such as 5-FU or taxanes. However, overall experience with chemotherapy in nonurothelial carcinomas is limited.

Independent of the specific regimen used, patients with metastatic disease are reevaluated after 2 to 3 cycles of chemotherapy, and treatment is continued for 2 more cycles in patients whose disease responds or remains stable. Surgery or radiotherapy may be considered in patients who show a major partial response in an unresectable primary tumor or who have a solitary site of residual disease that is resectable after chemotherapy. In selected series, this approach has been shown to afford a survival benefit. If disease is completely resected, 2 additional cycles of chemotherapy can be considered, depending on patient tolerance. Patients for whom surgery or radiotherapy is not considered an option are generally treated with chemotherapy for a maximum of 6 cycles, depending on their response. If no response is noted after 2 cycles or if significant morbidities are encountered, a change in therapy is advised, taking into account the patient's current performance status, extent of disease, and specific prior therapy administered. The same applies to patients who experience systemic relapse after adjuvant chemotherapy.

Second-line chemotherapy data are highly variable and unclear in this setting; therefore, no standard therapy exists. The panel highly recommends enrollment in a clinical trial. The available options for palliative chemotherapy depend on what was offered as first–line therapy. Docetaxel, paclitaxel, or gemcitabine monotherapy is preferred.85–88 Other options include cisplatin, carboplatin, doxorubicin, 5-FU, ifosfamide, pemetrexed, methotrexate, and vinblastine, with modest benefit limited to small phase II trials.89–93

T2, T3, and T4a Tumors
The critical issues in the management and prognosis of these patients are whether a palpable mass is appreciated at EUA and if the tumor has extended through the bladder wall. Tumors that are organ-confined (T2) have a better prognosis than those that have extended through the bladder wall to the perivesical fat (T3) and beyond. T4a tumors involve the prostatic stroma, uterus, or vagina and are typically surgically managed similar to T3 tumors.

Primary surgical treatment for T2, T3, and T4a lesions with no nodal disease seen on abdominal/pelvic CT or MRI scan is a radical cystectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy, with strong consideration of neoadjuvant chemotherapy based on 2 randomized trials (category 1).40,41 Stronger evidence supports neoadjuvant chemotherapy for T3 disease. If no neoadjuvant chemotherapy was given, postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy is considered based on pathologic risk, such as positive nodes and pathologic T3–T4 lesions (category 2B recommendation).

Partial cystectomy can be considered only in patients with T2 disease with a single tumor in a suitable location and no presence of Tis, along with consideration of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Partial cystectomy is not an option for patients with T3 or T4a disease. Adjuvant radiotherapy or chemotherapy based on pathologic risk, such as positive nodes, positive margin, high-grade lesions, and pathologic T3–T4 lesions, may be considered (category 2B recommendation). As with radical cystectomy, patients who have received neoadjuvant chemotherapy should not receive adjuvant chemotherapy after partial cystectomy.

Bladder-preservation strategy with concurrent chemotherapy and radiation (category 2B recommendation) is an option in highly selected patients. Candidates for bladder-sparing approaches are patients whose tumors present without hydronephrosis and tumors that allow a visibly complete or a maximally debulking TURBT. In patients with extensive comorbid disease or poor performance status, treatment options include TURBT alone, concurrent chemoradiation, or chemotherapy alone. Based on high-level evidence, only cisplatin alone or 5-FU and mitomycin C together are the drugs proven to be radio-sensitizing with radiation and are superior to radiation alone.61,62

If radiotherapy alone was offered initially, it may be continued up to 66 Gy. In addition, adjuvant chemotherapy may be considered for these patients to sustain remission (category 2B recommendation).

T4b Disease or Positive Nodes
For patients who show no nodal disease on abdominal/pelvic CT or MRI scans or biopsy, the primary treatment recommendation includes 2 to 3 courses of chemotherapy with or without radiotherapy followed by evaluation with TURBT, cystoscopy, and CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis. In highly selected patients with T4a node-negative disease, cystectomy with or without chemotherapy is another primary treatment option. If no evidence of tumor is present after primary chemotherapy, one may consider the consolidation chemotherapy regimen with or without radiation. Alternatively, cystectomy may also be considered as the subsequent management option for these patients. However, if residual disease is noted on evaluation after primary therapy, chemotherapy with or without radiation can be used. A change in chemotherapy regimen is reasonable. Cystectomy, if feasible, is again an option for patients who do and do not experience response to primary therapy.

For patients with positive nodes, documented on imaging, a biopsy is considered, if possible, to confirm nodal spread. Patients with positive nodes should receive chemotherapy with or without radiation and should be evaluated with cystoscopy, TURBT, and abdomen/pelvis imaging. If no residual tumor is detected, patients may receive a radiation boost or a cystectomy. If cancer is still present after primary therapy, patients should follow the pathway for metastatic disease.

Follow-Up After Surgery
Follow-up after a cystectomy should include urine cytology, liver function tests, creatinine, and electrolytes every 3 to 6 months for 2 years and then as clinically indicated. Chest, abdomen, and pelvis imaging should be conducted every 3 to 12 months for 2 years based on the risk of recurrence, and then as clinically indicated. Patients should be monitored annually for vitamin B12 deficiency if a continent diversion was created. Urethral wash cytology every 6 to 12 months is advised, particularly if Tis was found within the bladder or prostatic urethra.

Follow-up after a partial cystectomy is similar to that for a radical cystectomy, with the addition of monitoring for relapse in the bladder through serial cytologic examinations and cystoscopies (may include selected mapping biopsy) at 3- to 6-month intervals for the first 2 years, then at increasing intervals according to clinician discretion.

For patients who have undergone bladder preservation, attention to the bladder as a site of recurrence is only one part of the overall management, because these individuals remain at risk for recurrence elsewhere in the urothelial tract and distantly. Imaging studies and laboratory testing should be performed as outlined under postcystectomy follow-up. Additionally, continued monitoring of the urothelium with cystoscopy and urinary cytologies with or without mapping biopsy is a routine part of the management of all cases in which the bladder is preserved. Follow-up intervals are typically every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 years, then at increasing intervals as appropriate.

Recurrence or Persistent Disease After Surgery
Metastatic disease or local recurrence after cystectomy may be managed with palliative chemotherapy, radiation, or a combination of these.

A positive cytology with no evidence of disease in the bladder should prompt selective washings of the upper tracts and a biopsy of the prostatic urethra. If the results are positive, patients are managed as described in the following sections.

For patients who have their bladders preserved, a local recurrence or persistent disease should be evaluated as a new cancer. Recurrences are treated based on the extent of disease at relapse, with consideration of prior treatment. Tis, Ta, or T1 tumors are generally managed with intravesical BCG therapy or cystectomy. If no response is noted after BCG treatment, a cystectomy is advised. Invasive disease is generally managed with radical cystectomy, and a second attempt at bladder preservation is not advisable. Cystectomy may not be possible in a patient who has undergone a full course of external-beam radiotherapy and has bulky residual disease. For these patients, palliative chemotherapy is advised, generally with a regimen that is not cross-resistant to the one previously received. If the patient has not previously undergone radiotherapy, a course of such is an alternative. Palliative TURBT is also an option.

Metastatic Disease
Approximately half of all patients experience relapse after cystectomy, depending on the pathologic stage of the tumor and nodal status. Local recurrences account for 10% to 30% of relapses, whereas distant metastases are more common.

If metastasis is suspected, additional workup to evaluate the extent of the disease is necessary. This includes a chest CT and a bone scan if enzyme levels are abnormal or the patient shows signs or symptoms of skeletal involvement.

If the evidence of spread is limited to nodes, nodal biopsy should be considered and patients should be managed the same as those with T4 disease. Patients who present with disseminated metastatic disease are generally treated with systemic chemotherapy. Management of persistent disseminated disease may involve chemotherapy, radiation, or a combination of these. Details on the choice of regimens were discussed earlier.

Summary
Urothelial tumors represent a spectrum of diseases with a range of prognoses. After a tumor is diagnosed anywhere within the urothelial tract, the patient remains at risk for developing a new lesion at a different or same location and with a similar or more advanced stage. Continued monitoring for recurrence is an essential part of management, because most recurrences are superficial and can be treated endoscopically. Within each category of disease, more refined methods to determine prognosis and guide management, based on molecular staging, are under development, with the goal of optimizing each patient's likelihood of cure and chance for organ preservation.

For patients with more extensive disease, newer treatments typically involve combined modality approaches using recently developed surgical procedures, or 3-dimensional treatment planning for more precise delivery of radiation therapy. Although these are not appropriate in all cases, they offer the promise of an improved quality of life and prolonged survival.

Finally, within the category of metastatic disease, several new agents have been identified that seem superior to those currently considered standard therapies. Experts believe, therefore, that the treatment of urothelial tumors will evolve rapidly over the next few years, with improved outcomes for patients at all stages of disease. 
Accreditation Statement
This activity has been designated to meet the educational needs of physicians and nurses involved in the management of patients with cancer. There is no fee for this article. No commercial support was received for this article. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) is accredited by the ACCME to provide continuing medical education for physicians.

NCCN designates this journal-based CME activity for a maximum of 1.0 AMA PRA Category 1 Credit(s)™. Physicians should claim only the credit commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity.

NCCN is accredited as a provider of continuing nursing education by the American Nurses Credentialing Center‘s Commission on Accreditation.

This activity is accredited for 1.0 contact hour. Accreditation as a provider refers to recognition of educational activities only; accredited status does not imply endorsement by NCCN or ANCC of any commercial products discussed/displayed in conjunction with the educational activity. Kristina M. Gregory, RN, MSN, OCN, is our nurse planner for this educational activity.

All clinicians completing this activity will be issued a certificate of participation. To participate in this journal CE activity: 1) review the learning objectives and author disclosures; 2) study the education content; 3) take the posttest with a 66% minimum passing score and complete the evaluation at http://education.nccn.org/node/45597; and 4) view/print certificate.

Release date: May 9, 2014; Expiration date: May 9, 2015

Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this activity, participants will be able to:

Describe the diagnostic and histopathologic criteria of NEPC

Discuss the clinical features and outcomes of NEPC

Outline treatment options for patients with NEPC

Neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC) is a lethal form of prostate cancer, with most patients dying within 1 to 2 years of diagnosis.1,2 Pure localized small cell carcinoma of the prostate gland is rare (<1% of cases); focal neuroendocrine differentiation admixed with adenocarcinoma is more commonly observed in approximately 5% to 10% of cases, depending on the criteria and biomarkers used.3 In the localized disease setting, an increasing proportion of neuroendocrine differentiation confers an adverse prognosis independent of Gleason grade and tumor stage.4,5 In the metastatic, castration-resistant disease state, treatment-emergent NEPC (t-NEPC) can be observed at the development of resistance to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) and after progression while taking potent androgen receptor signaling inhibitors, including abiraterone and enzalutamide. Prior studies indicate that t-NEPC detected by immunohistochemical staining is found in approximately 20% to 30% of metastatic castration-resistant tumors.6 The true incidence of NEPC may be higher because of the recent introduction of more potent androgen receptor signaling inhibitors, underrecognition as a result of tumor heterogeneity, the limited number of metastatic tumor biopsies performed, the lack of a uniform consensus definition based on histology or biomarker expression, and frequent misclassification as high-grade prostate adenocarcinoma, especially in tumors with mixed histologies. More accurate detection and an increased understanding of the true prevalence of NEPC is needed, along with improved molecular and clinicopathologic classifications and novel therapeutic targeted approaches. This article reviews the diagnostic and histopathologic criteria, clinical features and outcomes, molecular characteristics, and therapeutic approaches toward NEPC.

Diagnosis, Nomenclature, and Histopathologic Classification
The terminology used to describe NEPC has varied in previous literature, and a more standardized set of definitions are needed. Pure small cell carcinoma represents a subset of NEPC, which is currently defined according to histopathologic features discussed herein. NEPC in turn represents a subset of a broader clinically defined prostate cancer phenotype that displays relative resistance to androgen receptor signaling inhibition (Figure 1). This clinically defined phenotype has been previously described as anaplastic prostatecancer7; however, aggressive variant may be a more appropriate term, because many, if not all, of the tumors do not display anaplastic pathologic features, and some may represent high-grade adenocarcinomas without neuroendocrine differentiation.

The histopathologic features of NEPC resemble those of neuroendocrine tumors of other sites of origin. An updated classification schema based on morphologic characteristics divides NEPC into the following categories: small cell carcinoma, large cell NEPC,8 adenocarcinoma with Paneth cells (rare),9 carcinoid tumors (rare),10 and adenocarcinoma admixed with neuroendocrine differentiation, which can exist either in primary untreated disease or, more commonly, as a treatment-emergent phenomenon on the development of resistance to ADT and secondary androgen receptor signaling inhibitors11 (Figure 2 and Table 1). ETS transcription factor family gene rearrangements are present in 60% to 70% of NEPC tumors, which are not observed in small cell cancers and neuroendocrine tumors originating from other anatomic sites. If present, this translocation can help confirm a prostate origin in cases of neuroendocrine tumors of unknown primary.12 The morphologic characteristics of small cell prostate cancer are similar to those of other small cell tumors, consisting of sheets of uniform cells with a high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, frequent mitotic figures, and diffuse infiltration with poorly circumscribed margins. Large cell neuroendocrine cancer is a less common variant of primary NEPC, consisting of solid sheets of cells with large nuclei and abundant, eosinophilic cytoplasm. The Paneth cell subtype is identified on hematoxylin-eosin stained pathology sections based on its intense eosinophilic staining pattern with large cytoplasmic granules. Carcinoid tumors represent low-grade, well-differentiated tumors with a uniform cellular pattern. The clinical significance of these histologic subtypes is based on the differential grade and proliferative index seen with each subtype (Table 1). Higher-grade subtypes, including small and large cell NEPC, with or without admixed adenocarcinoma, display a high proliferation index and more aggressive phenotype that often necessitates initiation of cytotoxic chemotherapy early in the treatment course.

Immunohistochemical biomarkers augment the sensitivity of detecting small cell and NEPC based on morphologic criteria alone (Figure 1). Induction of chromogranin A and synaptophysin expression, loss of androgen receptor and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) expression, and upregulation of CD56 can help distinguish NEPC from prostatic adenocarcinoma. However, significant overlap and heterogeneity may occur, especially in cases of mixed histologies or with poorly differentiated high-grade adenocarcinomas.13-16 For example, PSA and androgen receptor expression are observed in approximately one-quarter of tissue samples consisting predominantly of NEPC.12,17 Serum-based biomarkers, including chromogranin and neuron-specific enolase, may further aid in the detection of neuroendocrine differentiation, especially when metastatic disease sites are not accessible for tissue acquisition, but correlation with immunohistochemical positivity or molecular biomarkers is not very robust and has not been rigorously ascertained. Higher serum chromogranin levels may be associated with adverse disease outcomes, but do not seem to correlate with treatment response to standard cytotoxic chemotherapy in the metastatic setting.18,19 
The cellular origin of NEPC remains under debate. The expression of chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56 is observed in neuroendocrine cells and neural tissue found normally scattered throughout the benign prostate gland. In addition, poorly differentiated prostate cancers have a proclivity for perineural invasion, suggesting mimicry of a neural phenotype and, potentially, that NEPC arises from malignant transformation of preexisting neuroendocrine or neural tissue within the prostate gland. Alternatively, a transdifferentiation model has been proposed, whereby NEPC arises from prostate adenocarcinoma, and is supported by shared ETS transcription family gene rearrangements in tissues with mixed neuroendocrine/adenocarcinoma histologies and preclinical studies of prostate cancer cell lines (discussed herein) that support the plasticity between neuroendocrine and adenocarcinoma differentiation.

Clinical Features
Pure primary NEPC is a rare entity (<1%) with an incidence of 35 per 10,000 people each year, and frequently presents with symptoms related to locally invasive or metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis, including bowel or bladder invasion; hydronephrosis; visceral metastatic disease to the liver, lung, and central nervous system; and predominantly lytic bone metastases.20 Given the propensity for brain metastases, routine MR brain imaging is reasonable to consider in patients with NEPC. FDG-PET/CT scans are frequently positive in NEPC, and may be useful to obtain in select patients to evaluate for the presence of occult distant metastatic disease before initiating locally directed therapy. Paraneoplastic syndromes are infrequent but more common than in prostatic adenocarcinoma, and include parathyroid hormone (PTH)-related protein-induced hypercalcemia, Cushing disease, and limbic encephalopathy.15

The development of resistance to potent androgen signaling inhibitors in the metastatic setting can be associated with the development of t-NEPC. Preliminary studies indicate the presence of t-NEPC in approximately 30% of metastatic castration-resistant tumors.6 It has been suggested that the incidence of t-NEPC may be increasing with the widespread introduction of potent androgen signaling inhibitors, such as abiraterone and enzalutamide, into clinical practice.21 Before considering sequential androgen receptor-targeted therapy in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (eg, abiraterone after disease progression on enzalutamide, or vice versa), it is useful to determine whether any evidence of neuroendocrine transdifferentiation is present, which would predict for a lower likelihood of benefit with continued androgen receptor-targeted therapies. Clues from the patient’s presentation that suggest the presence of neuroendocrine differentiation include a limited response duration to primary ADT (<6 months); high PSA nadir on ADT (>4 ng/mL); visceral metastatic disease, including to the lung, liver, and central nervous system; predominantly lytic bone metastases; low absolute serum PSA in relation to disease burden; elevated serum markers of neuroendocrine differentiation, including chromogranin and neuron-specific enolase; and high levels of lactate dehydrogenase and/or elevated carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA) serum levels.17,19,22 Serum markers of NEPC should be checked in patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer with the clinical features of neuroendocrine differentiation outlined earlier. Although these clinical features may be suggestive of NEPC, the diagnosis currently remains histopathologic. Therefore, biopsy should be strongly considered whenever clinical features and/or serum markers are suggestive of neuroendocrine differentation. Standard pathologic evaluation should quantify the level of expression of chromogranin, synaptophysin, and neuron-specific enolase, and determine whether small cell features are present. A diagnosis of neuroendocrine differentiation has both prognostic and therapeutic implications, as discussed herein. In the research setting, biopsies of metastatic tumors are used to evaluate potential novel molecular biomarkers of neuroendocrine differentiation.
Molecular Characterization and Modeling of NEPC With Small Cell Features
Recent studies have revealed several molecular signatures of NEPC, including ERG gene rearrangement; amplification of Aurora kinase A (AURKA) and N-myc (MYCN); loss of Rb; activation of PI3K, Akt, and β-catenin; upregulation of EZH2; and downregulation of REST (regulator of neuronal gene expression).12,23-26 The TMPRSS2-ERG translocation is the most common gene rearrangement in prostate adenocarcinoma, occurring in 40% to 60% of cases. In 2011, Lotan et al12 showed that ERG gene rearrangements were present in a similar frequency of small cell prostate cancer tissues.12 Furthermore, concordance with respect to ERG gene rearrangement was seen between the acinar and small cell components of the available prostate samples, supporting a model of transdifferentiation toward NEPC from a common cellular origin.12 Downregulation of androgen receptor-driven TMPRSS2-ERG protein expression may represent a potential mechanism of neuroendocrine transdifferentiation. In a preclinical model, knockdown of ERG expression led to decreased PSA and increased chromogranin A levels.27 Preliminary studies suggest that enzalutamide-mediated blockade of androgen receptor-driven expression of the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion protein may promote the emergence of secondary NEPC.27 Induction of neuroendocrine markers has long been observed with antiandrogens in tissue culture; however, the precise mechanisms for this phenotypic change are unclear.28

Several recently reported studies of human NEPC tissue samples have identified potential novel molecular markers of neuroendocrine differentiation. One of the hallmarks of NEPC is loss of androgen receptor, and androgen receptor knockdown in an androgen receptor-sensitive cell line has been shown to correspond with neuroendocrine differentiation.28 Moreover, Lapuk et al23 identified decreased expression of REST, a transcription factor that represses neuronal differentiation, in NEPC. They further found REST binding sites on 28 of 50 transcriptionally active genes in NEPC and validated their findings in a cohort of 218 prostate tumors, in which they found REST downregulation in 50% of NEPC tumors.

A separate study published by Beltran et al24 showed overexpression of the AURKA protein in all NEPC tumors and amplification of the AURKA gene in 4 of 7 NEPC tumors. Interestingly, inhibition of AURKA in this study led to a loss of neuroendocrine differentiation, providing for the possibility of a mechanistic link between AURKA signaling and reversible NEPC. AURKA is known to stabilize N-myc, and amplification of MYCN was found in 40% of NEPC cases compared with only 4% of prostate adenocarcinoma cases.24 
In addition, the PI3K/Akt-mTOR pathway has been shown to be necessary for NEPC formation. Inhibition of PI3K led to decreased neuron-specific enolase expression, and transfection of activated Akt led to increased neuron-specific enolase expression, indicating a reversible NEPC activation.25 In a transgenic mouse model of prostate cancer using the TRAMP-C2 cell line, activation of Akt was shown to be necessary for NEPC differentiation, with a concurrent increase in β-catenin expression.26 When PI3K/Akt inhibitors were incorporated, β-catenin was not expressed and neuroendocrine differentiation was not seen.26

The plasticity of neuroendocrine transdifferentiation is supported by several independent preclinical studies and clinical studies of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NCSLC). Recent studies have described the transformation of NSCLC into small cell histologic variants at the time of developing epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor resistance.29 This histologic transformation was found to be reversible in several cases on EGFR inhibitor withdrawal and treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy, indicating the plasticity of this histologic transformation. Knockdown of androgen receptor expression in the androgen-sensitive LNCaP prostate cancer cell line induced increased neuroendocrine differentiation in a temporally related manner.28 Whether this neuroendocrine differentiation is reversible in patients with NEPC through stopping androgen receptor-targeted therapy is not known. Conversely, reversion back to the adenocarcinoma phenotype with loss of neuroendocrine markers was observed during therapy with an AURKA24 or mTOR inhibitor.26 These data suggest that potent inhibitors of key oncogenic pathways that regulate cellular differentiation, such as the EGFR and androgen receptor pathways, may lead to reversible histologic variants with altered biology and treatment response. The plasticity of neuroendocrine transdifferentiation with the application of treatment selection pressure has implications for future treatment strategies, which are discussed in the following section.

Modeling of NEPC/Small Cell Prostate Cancer
Several models of NEPC have been created that have yielded additional insights into the molecular drivers of neuroendocrine differentiation. Patient-derived xenografts were developed from a single patient with pelvic soft tissue metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, and implanted into CB17 SCID mice.30 Four of these xenograft tumors developed into large cell NEPC, and the other 4 developed into small cell NEPC. This finding suggests that large cell NEPC exists as an intermediate state in the spectrum of differentiation between prostate adenocarcinoma and pure small cell NEPC.30 The xenografts showed an absence of androgen receptor expression and loss of Rb and cyclin D1 expression.31 The xenograft model was validated in 24 NEPC and 44 tissue samples from patients with prostate adenocarcinoma; 96% of human NEPC samples showed loss of Rb and cyclin D1, compared with 23% of prostate adenocarcinoma samples.31 These data suggest that Rb loss may be a suitable molecular biomarker for NEPC, albeit with some overlap with adenocarcinoma.

The transgenic adenocarcinoma of the murine prostate (TRAMP) model in the Friend virus B (FVB) background has been shown to display features consistent with NEPC, including expression of neuroendocrine markers, transient and variable response to androgen signaling inhibition, and propensity for the formation of visceral metastases. This model may have increasing relevance in the interrogation of novel biomarkers and targeted therapies for the treatment of t-NEPC. The neuroendocrine TRAMP model is caused by a series of prostate-specific molecular events, including p53 loss, Rb loss, and expression of forkhead box factors FOXA1 and FOXA.32 This model was used to interrogate the PI3K/mTOR pathway in the context of neuroendocrine differentiation, as discussed earlier.26 Future molecular analyses of castration-resistant TRAMP and adenocarcinoma tumors during prolonged castration or androgen deprivation treatment may reveal additional insights into the timing and reversibility of the pathophysiology of t-NEPC.

Treatment of Small Cell Carcinoma and Prostate Cancer With Neuroendocrine Differentiation
The prognosis of small cell carcinoma of the prostate is poor. More than half of patients present with metastatic disease at diagnosis20; the remainder almost always present with locally advanced disease, for which radiation therapy is usually recommended. Given the propensity for the development of distant metastatic disease, concurrent platinum-based chemotherapy is usually recommended, consistent with treatment guidelines for limited-stage small cell carcinoma of the lung.33,34 However, distant relapse is common, often presenting as visceral metastases in the liver, lung, and central nervous system, along with the development of predominantly lytic bone metastases.

Advanced small cell prostate cancer and prostate cancer with extensive neuroendocrine differentiation are both highly proliferative subsets of prostate cancer and, as such, frequently respond rapidly to cytotoxic chemotherapy with minimal (if any) response to androgen deprivation. Pure small cell carcinoma with distant metastases should largely be treated with up-front chemotherapy rather than ADT. In prostate adenocarcinoma admixed with extensive neuroendocrine differentiation, it is reasonable to consider a trial of ADT, potentially in combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy. Pure small cell carcinoma is frequently treated with platinum plus etoposide combinations; admixed adenocarcinoma with neuroendocrine differentiation is frequently treated with docetaxel, which treats both the neuroendocrine and the adenocarcinoma components, or a combination of carboplatin plus docetaxel. Platinum-based treatment should be strongly considered in cases involving more extensive neuroendocrine differentiation and/or small cell features within the tumor biopsy. These regimens are based on retrospective series and single-arm phase II studies, including a prior series of 21 patients with metastatic small cell prostate cancer treated with a combination of platinum plus etoposide, in which 62% of patients experienced an objective tumor response.35 However, the duration of response was transient, with a median survival of less than 12 months in this series.

Several prospective clinical trials have investigated combination chemotherapeutic approaches. A single-arm phase II study investigated the use of carboplatin plus docetaxel in combination with prednisone in 113 patients with 1 or more of 7 prespecified criteria designed to capture anaplastic or aggressive phenotype prostate cancer: (1) histologic evidence of small cell prostate cancer (pure or mixed), (2) exclusively visceral metastases, (3) predominantly lytic bone metastases, (4) bulky pelvic soft tissue masses greater than 5 cm, (5) low serum PSA level (<10 ng/mL) in combination with high volume (>20) bone metastases, (6) positive immunohistochemistry staining of chromogranin or synaptophysin A or elevated serum markers of neuroendocrine differentiation plus elevations in lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), CEA, or malignant hypercalcemia, or (7) short-interval (<6 months) response to primary ADT.1 After disease progression on carboplatin plus docetaxel, patients were treated with cisplatin plus etoposide. Median overall survival for the entire study cohort was 16 months (95% CI, 13.6-19.0), and the proportion of patients who were progression-free after 4 cycles of carboplatin plus docetaxel and subsequent treatment with cisplatin plus etoposide (N=71) was 65.4% and 33.8%, respectively.1 The trial results suggest that continued platinum-based chemotherapy with the addition of etoposide may be a reasonable second-line therapy in patients with NEPC who experience disease progression on platinum plus taxane combinations, but further study of this combination is required. The heterogeneous patient population is reflected in the variable prognostic weight of each of the 7 criteria. Somewhat surprisingly, of the baseline 7 criteria, only the presence of bulky pelvic soft tissue disease greater than 5 cm was associated with both inferior progression-free and overall survivals. Although the presence of exclusive visceral metastatic disease was not associated with overall and progression-free survivals, this finding may reflect an underpowered trial as opposed to a negative association. Serum levels of LDH and CEA seemed to have more prognostic value than levels of chromogranin A or immunohistochemical positivity of chromogranin A and synaptophysin, illustrating that biomarkers other than traditional NEPC biomarkers may be prognostic. Immunohistochemistry staining for one or both of these markers was positive in 56.9% of the 51 samples available for analysis.1 The heterogeneity of the patient population and variability of biomarker expression highlight the need for novel molecular-based biomarkers to identify biologically distinct subsets of NEPC and thereby develop more-effective targeted therapies.

The recently discovered molecular alterations in t-NEPC, including the coamplification of AURKA and MYCN, may provide a therapeutic window. Preclinical studies indicate significant activity of AURKA inhibitors in NEPC models, and an ongoing phase II study is evaluating the efficacy of the AURKA inhibitor MLN8237 in patients with metastatic NEPC (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01799278). Prospective studies will be needed to validate AURKA gene amplification as predictive and/or prognostic biomarkers to guide treatment selection and as an enrichment criterion or stratification factor in future clinical studies. Given the molecular complexity of these tumors, strategies combining the inhibition of multiple pathways will likely be needed.

The plasticity toward neuroendocrine transdifferentiation observed with the application of androgen signaling inhibition in preclinical models suggests that transdifferentiation toward a neuroendocrine state may occur before overt clinical resistance to androgen signaling inhibition is seen,36 and that dual therapy targeting the 2 populations of cancer cells may provide therapeutic benefit. This hypothesis warrants testing in future clinical studies.

Summary
Prostate cancer with small cell features and neuroendocrine differentiation is an often lethal variant of the disease, occasionally presenting de novo, but more frequently developing in the setting of androgen receptor-targeting resistance. Emerging translational and preclinical studies are beginning to molecularly define this lethal subset of disease. These data should help improve on current histopathologic criteria and guide the development of predictive and/or prognostic biomarkers. Current treatment generally entails platinum-based chemotherapy and consideration of clinical trial enrollment; however, novel therapies are needed to lengthen response durations and improve long-term outcomes for this high-risk subset of patients with prostate cancer.

The authors have disclosed that they have no financial interests, arrangements, affiliations, or commercial interests with the manufacturers of any products discussed in this article or their competitors. 
Screening for prostate cancer has been a public health disaster,” announced Andrew J. Vickers, PhD, Attending Research Methodologist, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York City. At the center of the debate is the question of whether the benefits of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening (namely the reduction in mortality) outweigh the harms (overdiagnosis and overtreatment). According to Dr. Vickers and his colleague Peter R. Carroll, MD, MPH, Professor and Chair, Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, the answer depends on screening younger men than in the past, adherence to strict criteria for biopsy, aggressive treatment of men with high-risk disease, and active surveillance for men with low-risk disease. Both Drs. Carroll and Vickers are members of the NCCN Guidelines Panel for Prostate Cancer Early Detection.

Randomized Trials on PSA Screening
The results of 2 key trials (from the United States1 and Europe2) represent the primary basis of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) statement on screening for prostate cancer,3 reported Dr. Carroll. The USPSTF recommended against PSA-based screening for prostate cancer for men of any age in the general population.3

The Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial reported no benefit to prostate cancer screening after 7 to 10 years of follow-up.1 The rate of compliance with screening in the screening group was 85%, compared with 40% in the first year and 52% in the sixth year in the control group. Of note was the fact that approximately 74% of men in the usual care arm underwent screening at least once.

However, Dr. Carroll offered some caveats regarding the conclusions of the PLCO trial. “It was not a trial comparing screening and no screening but rather a trial of controlled screening versus ad hoc or opportunistic screening. It did not test the hypothesis that screening would be of benefit,” he revealed.

In the European Randomized Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC), Schröder et al2 found PSA-based screening significantly reduced mortality from prostate cancer. In the Göteborg arm of the ERSPC, “which started before ERSPC as an independent trial, there was a remarkable benefit, a 44% risk reduction,” declared Dr. Carroll. Of particular note, nearly half the patients in this trial did not undergo initial treatment, which Dr. Carroll stated showed that lives can be saved without treating all patients.

Dr. Vickers cautioned against combining the results of the PLCO and ERSPC. “These are different trials asking different questions,” he explained. Although there is much misunderstanding about the ERSPC, admitted Dr. Vickers, it was a “very large, well-conducted trial.” In addition, the ERSPC had a younger mean age at the start of screening and a lower PSA threshold for referral. Furthermore, Dr. Carroll noted the importance of a median follow-up of 11 years in the ERSPC trial. “Anytime you look at detection or treatment of early-stage prostate cancer, any positive effect only becomes apparent at 8 to 9 years.”

Updates from the ERSPC and the Scandinavian Prostate Cancer Group Study Number 4 (SPCG-4)4 may shed more light on the debate regarding the benefit of early screening and subsequent treatment for prostate cancer, according to Dr. Carroll. With the upcoming results from the ERSPC reaching out to 13 or 14 years, the absolute impact of such screening should be made clearer, Dr. Carroll said. “You will see a continuing, long-term positive impact.”

As for the SPCG-4 update comparing radical prostatectomy and watchful waiting in early-stage prostate cancer, extended follow-up confirmed a substantial reduction in prostate cancer-specific mortality, distant metastases, and the use of androgen deprivation in those treated with surgery, with the benefits more pronounced in men younger than age 65.4 “This is required reading for anyone interested in this subject,” declared Dr. Carroll.

Overdetection: The Achilles’ Heel of PSA Screening
Prostate cancer mortality may be reduced with prostate cancer screening, but the risk of overdiagnosis, compounded by overtreatment, is substantial.5 Although the magnitude of overdetection has been debated, the exact numbers vary, with differences in time periods, age, comorbidities, region, definition, and screening practices adding to the mix (Figure 1). According to Dr. Carroll, “the risk of overdetection in the United States, based on how we currently screen and define it, is approximately 40%, suggesting that many of these men harbor very low-risk, low-grade tumors that do not require treatment. This is the part that the USPSTF got right,” said Dr. Carroll. In addition, almost all of the excess diagnosis in prostate cancer is in older men (> age 65), added Dr. Vickers.

Undeniably, PSA screening leads to overtreatment, admitted both Dr. Vickers and Carroll. “Since the introduction of the PSA test in 1987, there has been a massive increase in the incidence of prostate cancer,” stated Dr. Vickers. However, the benefits of early detection should not be overestimated, noted Dr. Carroll, as the risk of dying of prostate cancer is low, and screening lowers it further.6

Furthermore, prostate cancer overdiagnosis has a strong relationship to age and PSA level.7 According to a recent study,7 the number of excess cases associated with the introduction of PSA screening in the United States would have been reduced by 85%, 68%, and 42% for age cutoffs of 60, 65, and 70, respectively, if PSA testing had been restricted to younger men. Thus, screening older men (> age 70) in only selected circumstances would reduce over-diagnosis and alter the benefit/harm ratio of PSA screening, the investigators concluded.

Updated NCCN Recommendations Reflect Changes in Rationale
In 2012, the NCCN Guidelines for Prostate Cancer Early Detection focused on screening early and often and using biopsy liberally, admitted Dr. Carroll. “It was a lengthy, circuitous path that we felt needed to be changed,” he added, speaking on behalf of the NCCN panel. “We had to make the guidelines more streamlined, readable, and actionable.”

The screening strategy reflected in the revised 2014 guidelines centers on several key criteria: a younger target population of healthy men (with and without an increased risk because of family history and/or ethnicity); more explicit indications for use of biopsy in men with abnormal PSA levels; and selective treatment of men with high-risk disease (Table 1). The goal of the panel was to limit the problem of overdetection without substantially impacting lives saved. 
Although we have been screening close to 50% of men in the older age range (70-79), “the key ages at which we should be screening men for prostate cancer are between 45 and 60,” declared Dr. Vickers. The updated guidelines define the target population for screening as between 50 and 70 years of age, with a category 2A consensus.

Testing in younger patients (ages 45-50; category 2B) should be considered. For those with a PSA level greater than 1 ng/mL, repeat testing is indicated at 1- to 2-year intervals. According to Dr. Carroll, annual screening may be no better than every 2 years, which is different from recommendations in past NCCN Guidelines, and there are enough data to suggest that screening at 2 years is reasonable. For younger men with a normal digital rectal examination (DRE) and a PSA level 1 ng/mL or less, testing should be repeated at age 50.

Testing in men older than age 70 is considered a category 2B option. “Men in this group should be screened very cautiously,” stated Dr. Carroll. If the DRE is normal, the PSA level is less than 3 ng/mL, and no other indications for biopsy are present, repeated testing may be considered at 1- to 2-year intervals. Regardless of age, men should be screened based on overall health and life expectancy, he added.

In previous versions of the guidelines, the criteria for biopsy were liberal, including such factors as an elevated PSA level, abnormal clinical examination, a low free-to-total PSA ratio, and a high PSA velocity. In the 2014 NCCN Guidelines, the panel provided more explicit indications for biopsy and allowed for less-frequent testing. For instance, the only category 2A indication for biopsy is now a PSA level greater than 3.0 ng/mL. A DRE that is highly suspicious of cancer at any PSA level has a category 2B ranking, and Dr. Carroll emphasized that this does not include minor abnormalities. Removed from the current guidelines is the use of PSA velocity at a low PSA level as a sole indication for biopsy. “We now know that PSA velocity is basically nonpredictive of aggressive prostate cancer,” explained Dr. Vickers. “The use of PSA velocity alone, at very low baseline PSA levels, can lead to overdetection,” added Dr. Carroll.

For men with more aggressive, high-risk disease, Dr. Vickers noted that typically we have been undertreating them with primary androgen deprivation therapy. “PSA is not a good marker for prostate cancer, but it is fabulous marker for aggressive prostate cancer,” he clarified. 
In addition, when surgery is performed, he added, it often is in the hands of surgeons who lack the necessary experience with radical prostatectomy, which can result in less-than-optimal outcomes.8 “The learning curve of radical prostatectomy is about 250 to 300 cases,” revealed Dr. Vickers. His research7 showed that approximately 80% of surgeons performed fewer than 10 procedures each year and thus are unlikely to reach the plateau of the learning curve during their careers.

In closing, Drs. Vickers and Carroll emphasized that the NCCN Guidelines for Prostate Cancer Early Detection should not be used independently of the NCCN Guidelines for Prostate Cancer, as they are tightly aligned. Moreover, active surveillance is recommended in low-risk disease, thereby minimizing the harms of overtreating patients.9

Dr. Carroll has disclosed that he has received grants or research support from Genomic Health, Inc., and consulting fees or honoraria from Intuitive Surgical, Inc., Jannsen Pharmaceutica Products, LP, Takeda Pharmaceuticals North America, Inc., and TEVA. Dr. Vickers has disclosed that he has received grants or research support from GlaxoSmithKline, royalty income from Arctic Partners, and has served as scientific advisor for Genomic Health, Inc., Genome DX, Ringful Health. Overview
Prostate cancer has surpassed lung cancer as the most common cancer in men. Experts generally accept that these changes resulted from prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening that detected many early-stage prostate cancers. An estimated 233,000 new cases will be diagnosed in 2014, accounting for 27% of new cancer cases in men in 2014.1 Fortunately, the age-adjusted death rates from prostate cancer have declined (-4.1% annually from 1994 to 2001). Researchers have estimated prostate cancer to account for 29,480 deaths in 2014.1 This comparatively low death rate suggests that, unless prostate cancer is becoming biologically less aggressive, increased public awareness with earlier detection and treatment has begun to affect mortality from this prevalent cancer. However, early detection and treatment of prostate cancers that do not threaten life expectancy result in unnecessary side effects, which impair quality of life and increase health care expenses, while decreasing the value of PSA and digital rectal exam (DRE) as early detection tests.

This guideline version includes NCCN Panel recommendations on treatment decisions for patients with localized disease. The full version of the guideline, including treatment of patients with advanced disease, can be found online at NCCN.org.

Estimates of Life Expectancy
Estimates of life expectancy have emerged as a key determinant of primary treatment, particularly when considering active surveillance or observation. Although estimating life expectancy for groups of men is possible, extrapolating these estimates to an individual patient is more difficult. Life expectancy can be estimated using the Minnesota Metropolitan Life Insurance Tables or the Social Security Administration Life Insurance Tables2 and adjusted for individual patients by adding or subtracting 50% based on whether one believes the patient is in the healthiest or unhealthiest quartile, respectively.3 As an example, the Social Security Administration Life Expectancy for a 65-year-old American man is 16 years. If he is judged to be in the upper quartile of health, a life expectancy of 24 years is assigned. If he is judged to be in the lower quartile of health, a life expectancy of 8 years is assigned. Thus, treatment recommendations could change dramatically using the NCCN Guidelines if a 65-year-old man was judged to be in either very poor or excellent health. 
Risk Stratification
Optimal treatment of prostate cancer requires assessment of risk: how likely is a given cancer to be confined to the prostate or to spread to the regional lymph nodes? How likely is the cancer to progress or metastasize after treatment? How likely is adjuvant or salvage radiation to control cancer after an unsuccessful radical prostatectomy? Prostate cancers are best characterized by clinical (TNM) stage determined by DRE, Gleason score in the biopsy specimen, and serum PSA level. Imaging studies (ultrasound, MRI) have been investigated intensively but have yet to be accepted as essential adjuncts to staging.

The NCCN Guidelines incorporate a risk stratification scheme that uses a minimum of stage, grade, and PSA to assign patients to risk groups. These risk groups are used to select the appropriate options that should be considered for treatment and to predict the probability of biochemical failure after definitive local therapy.4 Risk group stratification has been published widely and validated, and provides a better basis for treatment recommendations than clinical stage alone.5,6 The NCCN Prostate Cancer Panel recognized that heterogeneity exists within each risk group. For example, an analysis of 12,821 patients reported that men assigned to the intermediate-risk group by clinical stage (T2b-T2c) had a lower risk of recurrence than men categorized according to Gleason score (7) or PSA level (10-20 ng/mL).7 A similar trend of superior recurrence-free survival was seen in men placed in the high-risk group by clinical stage (T3a) compared with those assigned by Gleason score (8-10) or PSA level (>20 ng/mL), although it did not reach statistical significance.

The more clinically relevant information that is used in the calculation of time to PSA failure, the more accurate the result. The Partin tables8,9 were the first to achieve widespread use for counseling men with clinically localized prostate cancer. The tables give the probability (95% confidence intervals) that a patient with a certain clinical stage, Gleason score, and PSA will have a cancer of each pathologic stage. A nomogram is a predictive instrument that takes a set of input data (variables) and makes predictions about an outcome. Nomograms predict more accurately for the individual patient than risk groups, because they combine the relevant prognostic variables, regardless of value. Nomograms can be used to inform treatment decision-making for men contemplating active surveillance,10 radical prostatectomy,11-13 neurovascular bundle preservation,14-16 or omission of pelvic lymph node dissection (PLND) during radical prostatectomy,17 brachytherapy,11,18,19 or external beam radiation therapy (EBRT).11,20 Biochemical progression-free survival can be reassessed postoperatively using age, diagnostic serum PSA, and pathologic grade and stage.21,22 Potential success of adjuvant or salvage radiation therapy (RT) after unsuccessful radical prostatectomy can be assessed using a nomogram.11,23

None of the current models predict with perfect accuracy, and only some of these models predict metastasis11,22,24,25 and cancer-specific death.13,26 Given the competing causes of mortality, many men who sustain PSA failure will not live long enough either to develop clinical evidence of distant metastases or to die from prostate cancer. Those with a short PSA doubling time are at greatest risk of death. Not all PSA failures are clinically relevant; thus, PSA doubling time may be a more useful measure of risk of death.27 The NCCN Prostate Cancer Panel recommends that NCCN risk groups be used to begin discussing options for treatment of clinically localized prostate cancer and that nomograms be used to provide additional and more individualized information.

Imaging
Imaging techniques are useful for detecting metastases and tumor recurrence. Anatomic imaging techniques include radiographs, ultrasound, CT, and MRI. Functional techniques include radionuclide bone scan, PET, and advanced MRI such as spectroscopy and diffusion-weighted imaging.

Observation
Observation involves monitoring the course of prostate cancer with the expectation of providing palliative therapy when symptoms develop or a change in exam or PSA results suggest symptoms are imminent. Observation thus differs from active surveillance. The goal of observation is to maintain quality of life by avoiding noncurative treatment when prostate cancer is unlikely to cause mortality or significant morbidity. The main advantage of observation is avoiding possible side effects of unnecessary definitive therapy or androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT). But patients may be at risk for urinary retention or pathologic fracture without prior symptoms or increasing PSA level.

Observation is applicable to elderly men or frail patients with comorbidity that will likely out-compete prostate cancer. Johansson et al28 noted that only 13% of men developed metastases 15 years after diagnosis of T0 to T2 disease and only 11% had died of prostate cancer. Since prostate cancer will not be treated for cure for patients with shorter life expectancies, observation for as long as possible is a reasonable option based on physician discretion. Monitoring should include PSA and DRE. When symptoms develop or are imminent, patients can begin palliative ADT.

Active Surveillance
Active surveillance (also referred to as watchful waiting, expectant management, or deferred treatment) involves actively monitoring the course of the disease with the expectation to intervene if the cancer progresses. Unlike observation, active surveillance is mainly applicable to younger men with seemingly indolent cancer with the goal of deferring treatment and potential side effects. Because these patients have a longer life expectancy, they should be followed closely and treatment should start promptly if the cancer progressed, to avoid missing the chance for cure.

The advantages of active surveillance include 1) avoiding the side effects of definitive therapy that may not be necessary; 2) retaining quality of life and normal activities; 3) ensuring that small indolent cancers do not receive unnecessary treatment; and 4) decreasing initial costs. The disadvantages of active surveillance include 1) chance of missed opportunity for cure; 2) chance the cancer may progress or metastasize before treatment; 3) treatment of a larger, more aggressive cancer may be more complex with greater side effects; 4) nerve sparing at subsequent radical prostatectomy may be more difficult, which may reduce the chance of potency preservation after surgery; 5) increased patient anxiety of living with an untreated cancer;29 6) the requirement for frequent medical examinations and periodic prostate biopsies; 7) the uncertain long-term natural history of untreated prostate cancer; and 8) the timing and value of periodic imaging studies have not been determined.

Rationale
The panel remains concerned about the problems of overtreatment related to the increased frequency of diagnosis of prostate cancer from widespread use of PSA for early detection or screening (see NCCN Guidelines for Prostate Cancer Early Detection; available online at NCCN.org).

The debate about the need to diagnose and treat every man who has prostate cancer is fueled by the high prevalence of prostate cancer on autopsy of the prostate30; the high frequency of positive prostate biopsies in men with normal DREs and serum PSA values31; the contrast between the incidence and mortality rates of prostate cancer; and the need to treat an estimated 37 men with screen-detected prostate cancer32,33 or 100 men with low-risk prostate cancer34 to prevent one death from the disease. The controversy regarding overtreatment of prostate cancer and the value of prostate cancer early detection32-38 has been informed further by publication of the Goteborg study, a subset of the European Randomized Study for Screening of Prostate Cancer (ERSPC).39 Many believe that this study best approximates proper use of PSA for early detection because it was population based and involved a 1:1 randomization of 20,000 men who received PSA every 2 years and used thresholds for prostate biopsy of PSA greater than 3 and greater than 2.5 since 2005. The follow-up of 14 years is longer than the European study as a whole (9 years) and Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) (11.5 years).

Prostate cancer was diagnosed in 12.7% of the screened group compared with 8.2% of the control group. Prostate cancer mortality was 0.5% in the screened group and 0.9% in the control group, which gave a 40% absolute cumulative risk reduction of prostate cancer death (compared with ERSPC [20%] and PLCO [0%]). Most impressively, 40% of the patients were initially managed by active monitoring and 28% were still on active surveillance at the time these results were analyzed. To prevent a prostate cancer death, 12 men would need to be diagnosed and treated as opposed to the ERSPC in which 37 needed to be treated. Thus, early detection when applied properly should reduce prostate cancer mortality. However, that reduction comes at the expense of over-treatment that may occur in as many as 50% of men treated for PSA-detected prostate cancer.40

The best models of prostate cancer detection and progression estimate that 23% to 42% of all screen-detected cancers in the United States are overtreated41 and that PSA detection was responsible for up to 12.3 years of lead-time bias.42 The NCCN Prostate Cancer Panel responded to these evolving data with careful consideration of which men should be recommended for active surveillance. However, the panel recognizes the uncertainty associated with the estimation of chance of competing causes of death, the definition of very low- or low-risk prostate cancer, the ability to detect disease progression without compromising chance of cure, and the chance and consequences of treatment side effects.

Application
Epstein et al43 introduced clinical criteria to predict pathologically “insignificant” prostate cancer. Insignificant prostate cancer is identified by clinical stage T1c, biopsy Gleason score of 6 or lower, the presence of disease in fewer than 3 biopsy cores, 50% or less prostate cancer involvement in any core, and PSA density less than 0.15 ng/mL/g. Despite the usefulness of these criteria, physicians are cautioned against using these criteria as the sole decision point. Studies have shown that as many as 8% of cancers that qualified as insignificant using the Epstein criteria were not organ-confined based on postoperative findings.21,44

A new nomogram may be better.45 Although many variations on this definition have been proposed (reviewed by Bastian et al46), the panel reached a consensus that insignificant prostate cancer, especially when detected early using serum PSA, poses little threat to men with life expectancy less than 20 years. The confidence that Americans with very low-risk prostate cancer have a very small risk of prostate cancer death is enhanced by lead time bias introduced by PSA early detection that ranges from an estimated 12.3 years in a 55-year-old man to 6 years in a 75-year-old man.42

The role for active surveillance should increase with the shift toward earlier-stage diagnosis attributed to PSA testing. However, results from randomized or cohort studies comparing this deferral strategy with immediate treatment are mixed, partly due to heterogeneity of the patient populations (reviewed by Sanda and Kaplan47).

Ultimately, a recommendation for active surveillance must be based on careful individualized weighing of a number of factors, including life expectancy, general health condition, disease characteristics, potential side effects of treatment, and patient preference. Race is emerging as another important factor to consider, since African-American men who meet the criteria of very low-risk have been reported to show higher rates of upgrading and adverse pathology compared with men of other races.48

Surveillance Program and Reclassification Criteria
Each of the major active surveillance series has used different criteria for reclassification.49-53 Reclassification criteria were met by 23% of men with a median follow-up of 7 years in the Toronto experience,51 33% of men with a median follow-up of 3 years in the Johns Hopkins experience,53 and 16% of men with a median follow-up of 3.5 years in the UCSF experience50 (Table 1). Uncertainty regarding reclassification criteria and the desire to avoid missing an opportunity for cure have driven several reports in the past year that have dealt with the validity of commonly used reclassification criteria. The Toron- to group demonstrated that a PSA trigger point of a PSA doubling time less than 3 years could not be improved on using a PSA threshold of 10 or 20, PSA doubling time calculated in various ways, or PSA velocity greater than 2 ng/mL/yr.54

The Johns Hopkins group used biopsy-demonstrated reclassification to Gleason pattern 4 or 5 or increased tumor volume on biopsy as their only criteria for reclassification. Of 290 men on an annual prostate biopsy program, 35% demonstrated reclassification at a median follow-up of 2.9 years.55 Unfortunately, neither PSA doubling time (area under the curve [AUC], 0.59) nor PSA velocity (AUC, 0.61) was associated with prostate biopsy reclassification. Both groups have concluded that PSA kinetics cannot replace regular prostate biopsy, although treatment of most men who show reclassification on prostate biopsy prevents evaluation of biopsy reclassification as a criterion for treatment or reduction of survival. 
Repeat biopsy is useful to determine whether higher-grade elements are evolving although the risks appear small.56 This may influence prognosis and, hence, the decision to continue active surveillance or to proceed to definitive local therapy. Treatment of all men who developed Gleason pattern 4 on annual prostate biopsies has thus far avoided a prostate cancer death among 769 men in the Johns Hopkins study.53 However, whether treatment of all men who progressed to Gleason pattern 4 was necessary remains uncertain. Studies are in progress to identify the best trigger points at which interventions with curative intent may still be successful.

The Toronto group published on 3 patients who died of prostate cancer in their experience with 450 men.51 These 3 deaths led to them to revise their criteria for offering men active surveillance, since each of these 3 men probably had metastatic disease at the time of entry onto active surveillance. In 450 men followed for a median of 6.8 years, overall survival was 78.6% and prostate cancer-specific survival was 97.2%.51 Of the 30% (n=145) of men who progressed, 8% showed an increase in Gleason score, 14% showed PSA doubling time less than 3 years, 1% showed development of a prostate nodule, and 3% expressed anxiety. One hundred and thirty-five of these 145 men were treated; 35 by radical prostatectomy, 90 by RT with or without ADT, and 10 with ADT alone. Follow-up is available for 110 of these men, and 5-year biochemical progression-free survival is only 62% for those undergoing radical prostatectomy and 43% for those undergoing radiation.

By comparison, among 192 men on active surveillance who underwent delayed treatment at a median of 2 years after diagnosis in the Johns Hopkins experience,53 5-year biochemical progression-free survival was 96% for those undergoing radical prostatectomy and 75% for those undergoing radiation. These experiences contrast with the UCSF experience, in which 74 men who progressed on active surveillance and underwent radical prostatectomy were compared with 148 men who were matched by clinical parameters. The two groups were similar by pathologic Gleason grade, pathologic stage, and margin positivity. All men treated using radical prostatectomy after progression on active surveillance had freedom from biochemical progression at a median follow-up of 37.5 months, compared with 97% of men in the primary radical prostatectomy group at a median follow-up of 35.5 months.

The panel believes there is an urgent need for further clinical research regarding the criteria for recommending active surveillance, the criteria for reclassification on active surveillance, and the schedule for active surveillance especially as it pertains to prostate biopsies, which unfortunately come within an increasing burden. Literature suggests that as many as 7% of men undergoing prostate biopsy will suffer an adverse event,36 those with urinary tract infection are often fluoroquinolone-resistant,57 and radical prostatectomy may become technically challenging after multiple sets of biopsies, especially as it pertains to potency preservation.58

Radical Prostatectomy
Radical prostatectomy is appropriate for any patient whose tumor is clinically confined to the prostate. However, because of potential perioperative morbidity, radical prostatectomy should be reserved for patients whose life expectancy is 10 years or more. Stephenson et al13 reported a low 15-year prostate cancer-specific mortality of 12% in patients who underwent radical prostatectomy (5% for low-risk patients), although it is unclear whether the favorable prognosis is due to the effectiveness of the procedure or the low lethality of cancers detected in the PSA era.

Radical prostatectomy was compared with watchful waiting in a randomized trial of 695 patients with early-stage prostate cancer (mostly T2).59 With a median follow-up of 12.8 years, those assigned to the radical prostatectomy group had significant improvements in disease-specific survival, overall survival, and risk of metastasis and local progression. Overall, 15 men needed to be treated to avert 1 death; that number fell to 7 for men younger than 65 years of age. The results of this trial offer high-quality evidence to support radical prostatectomy as a treatment option.

Some patients at high or very high risk may still benefit from radical prostatectomy. In an analysis of 842 men with Gleason scores 8 to 10 at biopsy who underwent radical prostatectomy, predictors of unfavorable outcome included PSA level over 10 ng/mL, clinical stage T2b or higher, Gleason score 9 or 10, higher number of biopsy cores with high-grade cancer, and over 50% core involvement.60 Patients without these characteristics showed higher 10-year biochemical-free and disease-specific survival after radical prostatectomy compared with those with unfavorable findings (31% vs 4% and 75% vs 52%, respectively).

Radical prostatectomy is a salvage option for patients experiencing biochemical recurrence after primary RT, but morbidity (incontinence, erectile dysfunction, and bladder neck contracture) remains significantly higher than when radical prostatectomy is used as initial therapy.61,62 Overall and cancer-specific 10-year survival ranged from 54% to 89% and 70% to 83%, respectively.61

Operative Techniques and Adverse Effects
Long-term cancer control has been achieved in most patients with both the retropubic and the perineal approaches; high-volume surgeons in high-volume centers generally provide superior outcomes.63,64 Laparoscopic and robot-assisted radical prostatectomy are used commonly and are considered comparable to conventional approaches in experienced hands.65,66 In a cohort study using US Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Medicare-linked data on 8837 patients, minimally invasive compared to open radical prostatectomy was associated with shorter length of hospital stay, less need for blood transfusions, and fewer surgical complications, but rates of incontinence and erectile dysfunction were higher.67 Oncologic outcome of a robotic versus open approach was similar when assessed by use of additional therapies67 or rate of positive surgical margins,68 although longer follow-up is necessary. A meta-analysis of 19 observational studies (n=3893) reported less blood loss and lower transfusion rates with minimally invasive techniques than with open surgery.68 Risk of positive surgical margins was the same. Two recent meta-analyses showed a statistically significant advantage in favor of a robotic approach compared with an open approach in 12-month urinary continence 69 and potency recovery.70

An analysis of the Prostate Cancer Outcomes Study on 1655 men with localized prostate cancer compared long-term functional outcomes after radical prostatectomy or RT.71 At 2 and 5 years, patients who underwent radical prostatectomy reported higher rates of urinary continence and erectile function but lower rates of bowel urgency. However, no significant difference was observed at 15 years. In a large retrospective cohort study involving 32,465 patients, patients who received RT had a lower 5-year incidence of urologic procedures than those who underwent radical prostatectomy but a higher incidence of hospital admissions, rectal or anal procedures, open surgical procedures, and secondary malignancies.72

Return of urinary continence after radical prostatectomy may be improved by preserving the urethra beyond the prostatic apex and by avoiding damage to the distal sphincter mechanism. Bladder neck preservation may allow more rapid recovery of urinary control.73 Anastomotic strictures that increase the risk of long-term incontinence are less frequent with modern surgical techniques. Recovery of erectile function is related directly to the degree of preservation of the cavernous nerves, age at surgery, and preoperative erectile function. Improvement in urinary function also was seen with nerve-sparing techniques.74 Replacement of resected nerves with nerve grafts does not appear to be effective for patients undergoing wide resection of the neurovascular bundles.75

PLND
The decision to perform PLND should be guided by the probability of nodal metastases. The NCCN Prostate Cancer Panel chose 2% as the cutoff for PLND because this avoids 47.7% of PLNDs at a cost of missing 12.1% of positive pelvic lymph nodes.76

PLND should be performed using an extended technique.77,78 An extended PLND includes removal of all node-baring tissue from an area bounded by the external iliac vein anteriorly, the pelvic side wall laterally, the bladder wall medially, the floor of the pelvis posteriorly, Cooper’s ligament distally, and the internal iliac artery proximally. Removal of more lymph nodes using the extended technique has been associated with an increased likelihood of finding lymph node metastases, thereby providing more complete staging.79-81 A survival advantage with more extensive lymphadenectomy has been suggested by several studies, possibly due to elimination of microscopic metastases.80,82-84 PLND can be performed safely laparoscopically, robotically, or open, and complication rates should be similar for the three approaches.

RT
EBRT
Over the past several decades, RT techniques have evolved to allow higher doses of radiation to be administered safely. Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy (3D-CRT) uses computer software to integrate CT images of the patients’ internal anatomy in the treatment position, which allows higher cumulative doses to be delivered with a lower risk of late effects.24,85-87 The second-generation 3D technique, intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), is used increasingly in practice88 because compared with 3D-CRT it significantly reduces the risk of gastrointestinal toxicities and rates of salvage therapy without increasing side effects, although treatment cost is increased.89-91

Daily prostate localization using image-guided RT is essential with either 3D-CRT or IMRT for target margin reduction and treatment accuracy. Imaging techniques such as ultrasound, implanted fiducials, electromagnetic targeting and tracking, and endorectal balloon, can improve cure rates and decrease complications.

These techniques have permitted safer dose escalation, and results of randomized trials have suggested that dose escalation is associated with improved biochemical outcomes.92-95 Kuban et al95 published an analysis of their dose-escalation trial of 301 patients with stage T1b to T3 prostate cancer. Freedom from biochemical or clinical failure was higher in the group randomized to 78 compared with 70 Gy (78% vs 59%; P=.004) at a median follow-up of 8.7 years. The difference was even greater among patients with diagnostic PSA greater than 10 ng/mL (78% vs 39%; P=.001). In light of these findings, the conventional 70 Gy dose is no longer considered adequate. A dose of 75.6 to 79.2 Gy in conventional fractions to the prostate (with or without seminal vesicles) is appropriate for patients with low-risk cancers. Patients at intermediate and high risk should receive doses up to 81.0 Gy.89,96,97 Moderately hypofractionated image-guided IMRT regimens (2.4-4 Gy per fraction over 4-6 weeks) have been tested in randomized trials, and efficacy and toxicity have been similar to conventionally fractionated IMRT.98,99 These RT techniques can be considered as an alternative to conventionally fractionated regimens when clinically indicated.

EBRT of the primary prostate tumor shows several distinct advantages over radical prostatectomy. RT avoids complications associated with surgery, such as bleeding and transfusion-related effects, and risks associated with anesthesia, such as myocardial infarction and pulmonary embolus. IMRT and 3D-CRT techniques are available widely and are possible for patients at a wide range of ages. EBRT includes a low risk of urinary incontinence and stricture as well as a good chance of short-term preservation of erectile function.100

The disadvantages of EBRT include a treatment course of 8 to 9 weeks. Up to 50% of patients have some temporary bladder or bowel symptoms during treatment. There is a low but definite risk of protracted rectal symptoms from radiation proctitis, and the risk of erectile dysfunction increases over time.100,101 In addition, if the cancer recurs, salvage radical prostatectomy is associated with a higher risk of complications than primary radical prostatectomy.102 Contraindications to RT include prior pelvic irradiation, active inflammatory disease of the rectum, or a permanent indwelling Foley catheter. Relative contraindications include very low bladder capacity, chronic moderate or severe diarrhea, bladder outlet obstruction requiring a suprapubic catheter, and inactive ulcerative colitis.

EBRT for Early Disease: EBRT is one of the principle treatment options for clinically localized prostate cancer. The NCCN Prostate Cancer panel consensus was that modern RT and surgical series show similar progression-free survival in low-risk patients treated with radical prostatectomy or RT. In a study of 3546 patients treated with brachytherapy plus EBRT, disease-free survival remained steady at 73% between 15 and 25 years of follow up.103

EBRT for High-Risk or Very High-Risk Patients: EBRT has shown efficacy in patients at high risk and very high risk. One study randomized 415 patients to EBRT alone or EBRT plus 3-year ADT.104 In another study (RTOG 8531), 977 patients with T3 disease treated with RT were randomized to adjuvant ADT or ADT at relapse.105 Two other randomized phase III trials evaluated long-term ADT with or without radiation in mostly T3 patients.106,107 In all 4 studies, the combination group showed improved disease-specific and overall survival compared with single-modality treatment.

Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy
The relatively slow proliferation rate of prostate cancer is reflected in a low α/β ratio,108 most commonly reported between 1 and 4. These values are similar to that for the rectal mucosa. Since the α/β ratio for prostate cancer is similar to or lower than the surrounding tissues responsible for most of the toxicity reported with RT, appropriately designed radiation treatment fields and schedules using extremely hypo-fractionated regimens should result in similar cancer control rates without an increased risk of late toxicity.

Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) is an emerging treatment technique that delivers highly conformal, high-dose radiation in 5 or fewer treatment fractions, which are safe to administer only with precise, image-guided delivery.109 Single institution series with median follow-up as long as 6 years report excellent biochemical progression-free survival and similar early toxicity (bladder, rectal, and quality of life) compared with standard radiation techniques.108-114 According to a pooled analysis of phase II trials, the 5-year biochemical relapse-free survival rates are 95%, 84%, and 81% for low-, intermediate-, and high-risk patients, respectively.115 SBRT can be considered cautiously as an alternative to conventionally fractionated regimens at clinics with appropriate technology, physics, and clinical expertise. Longer follow-up and prospective multi-institutional data are required to evaluate longer-term results, especially since late toxicity theoretically could be worse in hypofractionated regimens compared with conventional fractionation (1.8-2.0 Gy per fraction).

Brachytherapy
Brachytherapy is used traditionally for low-risk cases since earlier studies found it less effective than EBRT for high-risk disease.6,116 However, increasing evidence suggests that technical advancements in brachytherapy may provide a role for contemporary brachytherapy in high-risk localized and locally advanced prostate cancer.117 Brachytherapy involves placing radioactive sources into the prostate tissue. There are currently 2 methods for prostate brachytherapy: low dose-rate (LDR) and high dose-rate (HDR).

LDR Brachytherapy: LDR brachytherapy consists of placement of permanent seed implants in the prostate. The short range of the radiation emitted from these low-energy sources allows delivery of adequate dose levels to the cancer within the prostate, whereas excessive irradiation of the bladder and rectum can be avoided. Current brachytherapy techniques attempt to improve the radioactive seed placement and radiation dose distribution.

The advantage of brachytherapy is that the treatment is completed in 1 day with little time lost from normal activities. In appropriate patients, the cancer-control rates appear comparable to radical prostatectomy (over 90%) for low-risk tumors with medium-term follow-up.118 In addition, the risk of incontinence is minimal in patients without a previous transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP), and erectile function is preserved in the short term.101 Disadvantages of brachytherapy include the requirement for general anesthesia and the risk of acute urinary retention. Irritative voiding symptoms may persist for as long as 1 year after implantation. The risk of incontinence is greater after TURP because of acute retention and bladder neck contractures, and many patients develop progressive erectile dysfunction over several years. IMRT causes less acute and late genitourinary toxicity and similar freedom from biochemical failure compared with iodine-125 or palladium-103 permanent seed implants.119,120

Permanent brachytherapy as monotherapy is indicated for patients with low-risk cancers (cT1c-T2a; Gleason grade, 2-6; PSA, <10 ng/mL). For intermediate-risk cancers, brachytherapy may be combined with EBRT (45 Gy) with or without neoadjuvant ADT, but the complication rate increases.121,122 Patients with high-risk cancers are generally considered poor candidates for permanent brachytherapy.

Patients with very large or very small prostates, symptoms of bladder outlet obstruction (high International Prostate Symptom Score), or a previous TURP are not ideal candidates for brachytherapy. These patients have an increased risk of side effects, and implantation may be more difficult with them. Neoadjuvant ADT may be used to shrink the prostate to an acceptable size, however, increased toxicity would be expected from ADT and prostate size may not decline. Postimplant dosimetry should be performed to document the quality of the implant.123 The recommended prescribed doses for monotherapy are 145 Gy for iodine-125 and 125 Gy for palladium-103.

HDR Brachytherapy: HDR brachytherapy, which involves temporary insertion of a radiation source, is a newer approach that provides a “boost” dose in addition to EBRT for patients at high risk of recurrence. Combining EBRT (40-50 Gy) and HDR brachytherapy allows dose escalation while minimizing acute or late toxicity in patients with high-risk localized or locally advanced cancer.124-127 Studies have demonstrated reduced risk of recurrence with the addition of brachytherapy to EBRT.128-130 Analysis of a cohort of 12,745 patients at high risk found that treatment with brachytherapy (hazard ratio [HR], 0.66; 95% CI, 0.49-0.86) or brachytherapy plus EBRT (HR, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.66-0.90) lowered disease-specific mortality compared with EBRT alone.131 Common boost doses include 9.5 to 11.5 Gy times 2 fractions, 5.5 to 7.5 Gy times 3 fractions, or 4.0 to 6.0 Gy times 4 fractions. A commonly used regimen for HDR treatment alone includes 13.5 Gy times 2 fractions.

Addition of ADT (2 or 3 years) to brachytherapy and EBRT is common for patients at high risk of recurrence. The outcome of trimodality treatment is excellent, with 9-year progression-free survival and disease-specific survival reaching 87% and 91%, respectively.132,133 However, it remains unclear whether the ADT component contributes to outcome improvement. D’Amico et al134 studied a cohort of 1342 patients with PSA over 20 ng/mL and clinical T3/T4 and/or Gleason score 8 to 10 disease. Addition of either EBRT or ADT to brachytherapy did not confer an advantage over brachytherapy alone. The use of all 3 modalities reduced prostate cancer-specific mortality compared with brachytherapy alone (adjusted HR, 0.32; 95% CI, 0.14-0.73). Other analyses did not find an improvement in failure rate when ADT was added to brachytherapy and EBRT.135,136

Two groups have observed a lower risk of urinary frequency, urgency, and rectal pain with HDR brachytherapy compared with LDR brachytherapy (permanent seed implant).137,138 Vargas et al139 reported that HDR brachytherapy results in a lower risk of erectile dysfunction than LDR brachytherapy.

Proton Therapy
Proton beams can be used as an alternative radiation source.140 The costs associated with proton beam facility construction and proton beam treatment are high.141 Two comparisons between proton beam therapy and EBRT show similar early toxicity rates.141,142 A single-center report of prospectively collected quality-of-life data 3 months, 12 months, and more than 2 years after treatment revealed significant problems with incontinence, bowel dysfunction, and impotence.142 Perhaps most concerning is that only 28% of men with normal erectile function maintained normal erectile function after therapy.

The NCCN panel echoed the following statement by ASTRO in its review of proton beam therapy:
“Prostate cancer has the most patients treated with conformal proton therapy of any other disease site. The outcome is similar to IMRT therapy, however, with no clear advantage from clinical data for either technique in disease control or prevention of late toxicity. This is a site where further head-to-head clinical trials may be needed to determine the role of proton beam therapy. In addition, careful attention must be paid to the role of dosimetric issues including correction for organ motion in this disease. Based on current data, proton therapy is an option for prostate cancer, but no clear benefit over the existing therapy of IMRT photons has been demonstrated.”143

Other Local Therapies
Cryosurgery, also known as cryotherapy or cryoablation, is an evolving minimally invasive therapy that achieves damage to tumor tissue through local freezing. The reported 5-year biochemical disease-free rate after cryotherapy ranged from 65% to 92% in low-risk patients using different definitions of biochemical failure.144 A report suggests that cryotherapy and radical prostatectomy give similar oncologic results for unilateral prostate cancer.145 A study by Donnelly et al146 randomly assigned 244 men with T2 or T3 disease to either cryotherapy or RT. All patients received neoadjuvant ADT. No difference was seen in 3-year overall or disease-free survival. Patients who received cryotherapy reported poorer sexual function.147 For patients with locally advanced cancer, cryoablation was associated with lower 8-year biochemical progression-free rate compared with EBRT in a small trial of 62 patients, although disease-specific and overall survival were similar.148

Other emerging local therapies, such as high intensity focused ultrasound and vascular-targeted photodynamic therapy, also warrant further study.149

Androgen Deprivation Therapy
ADT for Low-Risk Patients
In the community, ADT has commonly been used as primary therapy for early-stage, low-risk disease, especially in the elderly. This practice was challenged in a study with a large cohort of 19,271 elderly men with T1 or T2 tumors.150 No survival benefit was found in patients receiving ADT compared with observation alone. Placing elderly patients with early prostate cancer on ADT should not be routine practice.

ADT for Intermediate-Risk Patients
The addition of short-term ADT to radiation improved overall and cancer-specific survival in 3 randomized trials including 20% to 60% of men with intermediate-risk prostate cancer (Tran Tasman Radiation Oncology Group [TROG] 9601, Dana Farber Cancer Institute [DFCI] 95096, and Radiation Therapy Oncology Group [RTOG] 9408).151-153 Only a cancer-specific survival benefit was noted in a fourth trial that recruited mostly high-risk men (RTOG 8610).154 The addition of short-course ADT to RT in men with intermediate-risk disease is an option.

ADT for High-Risk or Very High-Risk Patients
As discussed previously, ADT combined with RT is an effective primary treatment for patients at high risk or very high risk. Combination therapy was associated consistently with improved disease-specific and overall survival compared with single-modality treatment in randomized phase III studies.104-107

Increasing evidence favors long-term over short-term neoadjuvant, concurrent, or adjuvant ADT for high-risk patients. The RTOG 9202 trial included 1521 patients with T2c to T4 prostate cancer who received 4 months of ADT before and during RT.155 They were randomized to no further treatment or an additional 2 years of ADT. At 10 years, the long-term group was superior for all endpoints except overall survival. A subgroup analysis of patients with Gleason score 8 to 10 found an advantage in overall survival for long-term ADT (32% vs 45%; P=.0061). The EORTC 22961 trial also showed superior survival when 2.5 years of ADT were added to RT given with 6 months of ADT in 970 patients, most of whom had T2c to T3, N0 disease.156 In a secondary analysis of RTOG 8531 that mandated lifelong ADT, those who adhered to the protocol had better survival than those who discontinued ADT within 5 years.157

Adjuvant ADT after Radical Prostatectomy
Neoadjuvant or adjuvant ADT generally confers no added benefit in men who have undergone radical prostatectomy.158 The role of adjuvant ADT after radical prostatectomy is restricted to cases in which positive pelvic lymph nodes are found, although reports in this area reveal mixed findings. Messing et al159 randomly assigned patients to immediate ADT or observation who were found to have positive lymph nodes at the time of radical prostatectomy. At a median follow-up of 11.9 years, those receiving immediate ADT had a significant improvement in overall survival (HR, 1.84; 95% CI, 1.01-3.35). However, a meta-analysis resulted in a recommendation against ADT for pathologic lymph node metastatic prostate cancer in the ASCO guidelines.160 A cohort analysis of 731 men with positive nodes failed to demonstrate a survival benefit of ADT initiated within 4 months of radical prostatectomy compared with observation.161

Anti-androgen monotherapy (bicalutamide) after completion of primary treatment was investigated as an adjuvant therapy in patients with localized or locally advanced prostate cancer, but results did not support its use in this setting.162,163

NCCN Recommendations
Initial Clinical Assessment and Staging Evaluation
For patients with a life expectancy of 5 years or less and without clinical symptoms, further workup or treatment should be delayed until symptoms develop. If high-risk factors (bulky T3-T4 cancers or Gleason score 8-10) for developing hydronephrosis or metastases within 5 years are present, ADT or RT may be considered. Patients with advanced cancer may be candidates for observation if the risks and complications of therapy are judged to be greater than the benefit in terms of prolonged life or improved quality of life.

For symptomatic patients or those with a life expectancy of more than 5 years, a bone scan is appropriate for patients with any of the following: 1) T1 disease with PSA over 20 ng/mL or T2 disease with PSA over 10 ng/mL;164 2) a Gleason score of 8 or higher; 3) T3 to T4 tumors; or 4) symptomatic disease. Pelvic CT or MRI scanning is recommended in T3 or T4 disease, or if T1 or T2 disease and a nomogram indicate that a greater than 10% chance of lymph node involvement, although staging studies may not be cost effective until the chance of lymph node positivity reaches 45%.165 Biopsy should be considered for further evaluation of suspicious nodal findings. For all other patients, no additional imaging is required for staging. NCCN panelists voiced concern about inappropriate use of PET imaging in the community setting. FDG or fluoride PET is not recommended for initial assessment.

The staging workup is used to categorize patients according to their risk of recurrence or disease progression or recurrence into those with clinically localized disease at very low, low, intermediate, or high risk, or those with locally advanced disease at very high risk, or those with metastatic disease.

Very Low Risk
Men with all of the following tumor characteristics are categorized in the very low-risk group: clinical stage T1c, biopsy Gleason score 6 or lower, PSA lower than 10 ng/mL, presence of disease in fewer than 3 biopsy cores, 50% or less prostate cancer involvement in any core, and PSA density less than 0.15 ng/mL/g. Given the potential side effects of definitive therapy, men in this group who have an estimated life expectancy less than 10 years should undergo observation. Unlike active surveillance, observation schedules do not involve biopsies. Men with very low risk and a life expectancy of 10 to 20 years should undergo active surveillance. For patients who meet the very low-risk criteria but who have a life expectancy of 20 years or above, the NCCN Panel agreed that active surveillance, RT or brachytherapy, or radical prostatectomy are all viable options.

Low Risk
The NCCN Guidelines define the low-risk group as patients with tumors stage T1 to T2a, low Gleason score (≤6), and serum PSA level below 10 ng/mL. Observation is recommended for men with low-risk prostate cancer and life expectancy less than 10 years. If the patient’s life expectancy is 10 years or more, initial treatment options include 1) active surveillance; 2) RT or brachytherapy; or 3) radical prostatectomy with or without a PLND if the predicted probability of pelvic lymph node involvement is 2% or greater. ADT as a primary treatment for localized prostate cancer does not improve survival and is not recommended by the NCCN panel.

At this time, cryotherapy or other local therapies are not recommended as routine primary therapy for localized prostate cancer due to lack of long-term data comparing these treatments to radiation or radical prostatectomy.

Intermediate Risk
The NCCN Guidelines define the intermediate-risk group as patients with any T2b to T2c cancer, Gleason score of 7, or PSA value of 10 to 20 ng/mL. Patients with multiple adverse factors may be shifted into the high-risk category.

Options for patients with life expectancy less than 10 years include 1) observation; 2) RT with or without ADT (4 to 6 months), and with or without brachytherapy; or 3) brachytherapy alone. Initial treatment options for patients with an expected survival of 10 years or more include 1) radical prostatectomy, including a PLND if the predicted probability of lymph node metastasis is 2% or greater; 2) RT with or without 4 to 6 months of ADT and with or without brachytherapy; or 3) brachytherapy alone for patients with favorable factors (cT1c, Gleason score 7, low volume). Active surveillance is not recommended for patients with a life expectancy more than 10 years (category 1).

High Risk
Men with prostate cancer that is clinically localized stage T3a, Gleason score 8 to 10, or PSA level greater than 20 ng/mL are categorized by the NCCN Guidelines panel as high risk. Patients with multiple adverse factors may be shifted into the very high-risk category. The preferred treatment is RT in conjunction with 2 to 3 years of ADT (category 1); ADT alone is insufficient. In particular, patients with low-volume, high-grade tumor warrant aggressive local radiation combined with typically 2 or 3 years of ADT. The combination of EBRT and brachytherapy, with or without ADT (typically 2 or 3 years), is another primary treatment option. However, the optimal duration of ADT in this setting remains unclear.

Radical prostatectomy with PLND remains an option as a subset of men in the high-risk group may benefit from surgery.

Very High Risk
Patients at very high risk are defined by the NCCN Guidelines as those with clinical stage T3b to T4 (locally advanced). The options for this group include 1) RT and long-term ADT (category 1); 2) EBRT plus brachytherapy with or without long-term ADT; 3) radical prostatectomy plus PLND in selected patients with no fixation to adjacent organs; or 4) ADT for patients not eligible for definitive therapy.

Disease Monitoring
For patients who choose active surveillance, an appropriate active surveillance schedule includes a PSA determination no more often than every 6 months unless clinically indicated, a DRE no more often than every 12 months unless clinically indicated, and repeat prostate biopsy no more often than every 12 months unless clinically indicated. A repeat prostate biopsy within 6 months of diagnosis is indicated if the initial biopsy was less than 10 cores or if assessment results show discordance.

Reliable parameters of prostate cancer progression await the results of ongoing clinical trials. A change in prostate exam results or increase in PSA level may prompt consideration of a repeat biopsy at the discretion of the physician. A repeat biopsy can be considered as often as annually to assess for disease progression. Repeat biopsies are not indicated when life expectancy is less than 10 years or when men are on observation. Multiparametric MRI may be considered to exclude the presence of anterior cancer if the PSA level rises and systematic prostate biopsy remains negative.166 However, multiparametric MRI is not recommended for routine use. PSA doubling time is not considered reliable enough to be used alone to detect disease progression.167

If the repeat biopsy shows Gleason 4 or 5 disease or if tumor is found in a greater number of cores or in a higher percentage of a given core, cancer progression may have occurred.

For patients initially treated with intent to cure, a serum PSA level should be measured every 6 to12 months for the first 5 years and then annually. PSA testing every 3 months may be required for men at high risk of recurrence. When prostate cancer recurred after radical prostatectomy, Pound et al168 found that 45% of patients experienced recurrence within the first 2 years, 77% within the first 5 years, and 96% by 10 years. Because local recurrence may result in substantial morbidity and can, in rare cases, occur in the absence of a PSA elevation, an annual DRE also is appropriate to monitor for prostate cancer recurrence as well as to detect colorectal cancer. Similarly, after RT, the monitoring of serum PSA levels is recommended every 6 months for the first 5 years and then annually and a DRE is recommended annually. The clinician may opt to omit the DRE if PSA levels remain undetectable.

The intensity of clinical monitoring for patients presenting with nodal positive or metastatic disease is determined by the response to initial ADT, radiotherapy, or both. Follow-up evaluation of these patients should include a history and physical examination, DRE, and PSA determination every 3 to 6 months based on clinical judgment.

Patients being treated with either medical or surgical ADT are at risk for having or developing osteoporosis. A baseline bone mineral density study should be considered for these patients. Supplementation is recommended using calcium (500 mg) and vitamin D (400 IU). Men who are osteopenic or osteoporotic should be considered for bisphosphonate therapy.

Patients under observation should be monitored for symptom development at 6 to 12 month intervals. PSA, renal function, and red cell mass may be assessed.

Adjuvant Therapy after Radical Prostatectomy
Most patients who have undergone a radical prostatectomy are cured of prostate cancer. However, some men will experience pathologic or biochemical failure. Selecting men appropriately for adjuvant or salvage radiation is difficult. However, recently published trials provide high-level evidence that can be used to counsel patients more appropriately. Thompson et al169 reported the results of the SWOG 8794 trial enrolling 425 men with extraprostatic cancer treated with radical prostatectomy. Patients were randomized to receive either adjuvant RT or usual care, and follow-up has reached a median of 12.6 years. The initial study report revealed that adjuvant RT reduced the risk of PSA relapse and disease recurrence.170 An update reported improved 10-year biochemical failure-free survival for high-risk patients (seminal vesicle positive) receiving postprostatectomy adjuvant radiation compared with observation (36% vs 12%; P=.001).171

Another randomized trial conducted by the EORTC172 compared postprostatectomy observation and adjuvant RT in 1005 patients. All patients had extraprostatic extension or positive surgical margins. The 5-year biochemical progression-free survival significantly improved with RT compared with observation for patients with positive surgical margins (78% vs 49%), but benefit was not seen for patients with negative surgical margins.

A German study by Wiegel et al173 reported results for 268 patients. All participants had pT3 disease and undetectable PSA levels after radical prostatectomy. Postoperative radiation improved 5-year biochemical progression-free survival compared with observation alone (72% vs 54%; HR, 0.53; 95% CI, 0.37-0.79). Collectively, these trial results suggest that continued follow-up of these series of patients may show a survival advantage.

Although observation after radical prostatectomy is appropriate, adjuvant RT after recuperation from surgery (usually within 1 year) is likely beneficial in men with shorter PSA doubling times (<9 months) or adverse laboratory or pathologic features, which include positive surgical margin, seminal vesicle invasion, and extracapsular extension. Positive surgical margins are unfavorable especially if diffuse (>10 mm margin involvement or ≥3 sites of positivity) or associated with persistent serum levels of PSA. The defined target volumes include the prostate bed. The pelvic lymph nodes may be irradiated, but pelvic radiation is not necessary.

Several management options should be considered if positive lymph nodes are found during or after radical prostatectomy. ADT is a category 1 option. Another option is observation, which is a category 2A recommendation for very low-risk or low-risk patients but category 2B for patients at intermediate, high, or very high risk. A third option is addition of pelvic RT to ADT (category 2B). This is based on retrospective data demonstrating improved biochemical recurrence-free survival and cancer-specific survival with postprostatectomy RT and ADT compared with adjuvant ADT alone in 250 patients with lymph node metastases.174  
Background
The period immediately after cancer diagnosis can be considered a point of turbulence for the management of preexisting chronic conditions. Cancer is often considered a dominant condition that eclipses the management of all other chronic conditions.1 Among individuals with cancer, the management of chronic conditions that are not related to cancer may be neglected.2 Undermining the management of chronic conditions in patients with cancer may result in adverse outcomes and poor quality of care for non–cancer-related conditions. For example, among elderly men (age ≥66 years) with localized prostate cancer, the quality of care for acute chronic conditions is neglected.3 Furthermore, among men of all ages with prostate cancer, many hospitalizations are attributable to chronic conditions other than prostate cancer. For example, using the encounter-level data for 1997 through 2004, Milenkovic et al4 found that among adults with prostate cancer, 84% of the inpatient encounters were for chronic conditions other than prostate cancer. Although these studies confirm the burden of noncancer hospitalizations (NCHs) among men with prostate cancer, the changes in hospitalizations attributable to noncancer conditions over a period of prostate cancer diagnosis remain unknown because of the use of encounter level data.

An understanding of the risk of NCH in patients diagnosed with incident prostate cancer is critical to better manage their care at the time of the finding. Therefore, the primary objective of the current study is to analyze the impact of cancer diagnosis on NCHs among elderly men with incident prostate cancer by comparing the rates of NCHs in 6 periods before and after the prostate cancer diagnosis.

Furthermore, elderly men with prostate cancer have differential rates of chronic conditions. For example, cardiometabolic conditions (eg, heart disease and diabetes) are observed in 18.1% of men with prostate cancer, followed by respiratory conditions (eg, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 9.8%)5 and mental health conditions (eg, depression, 8%).6 Thus, the risk for hospitalizations may differ by the types of chronic conditions. One study, not specific to prostate cancer, reported that adults aged 50 years and older in the United States with cardiometabolic conditions had higher rates of annual hospitalizations (40%) compared with those with respiratory conditions (20%).7 The incidence of prostate cancer can have a varying impact on the risk for NCHs among individuals with different types of chronic conditions. Therefore, the secondary objective of our study is to examine whether the impact of cancer diagnosis on NCHs differs by the types of chronic conditions.

Methods
Study Design
A retrospective longitudinal cohort design with baseline, precancer and postcancer periods were used. Using the date of cancer diagnosis as the index date, a 24-month window before the index date was constructed. This 24-month period was split into two 12-month periods (ie, baseline and precancer period). This was necessary because identification of preexisting chronic conditions and NCHs during the precancer period involved the use of inpatient claims. To avoid circular reasoning, the first 12-month period was used as the baseline period, during which the types of chronic conditions and other independent variables were measured. The 12-month period before the diagnosis of cancer was considered the precancer period and this period was used to derive NCHs. The postcancer period consisted of 12 months after the diagnosis of cancer. To ensure a robust study design, the NCHs were measured repeatedly every 120 days during the precancer and postcancer period, yielding a total 6 repeated measures per individual. Thus, t1, t2, and t3 represented the precancer period and t4, t5, and t6 represented the postcancer period (Figure 1).

Data Sources
SEER-Medicare Linked Data: We used the NCI's SEER cancer registries data linked with Medicare administrative claims data. As of now, the SEER data represent 28% of the US population from 18 registries and consist of a total of 7,397,159 malignant cancer cases, and most of these cancer cases are diagnosed among the elderly population aged 65 years and older.8 Medicare is the US Government–mandated insurance program covering 97% of the US population aged 65 years and older.9 A total of 93% of men aged 65 years and older in SEER has been linked to Medicare enrollment records.9,10 In the current study, we used data from the SEER-Medicare linked database of prostate cancer cases diagnosed between 2002 and 2009 and their linked claims between 2000 and 2010. Furthermore, we included elderly men aged 67 years and older because we required at least 2 years of health care utilization data before diagnosis of prostate cancer.

Study Cohort: The study population was based on 289,701 men diagnosed with incident prostate cancer between January 1, 2002, and December 31, 2009. Men with multiple cancers (N=25,785), those diagnosed with prostate cancer during the autopsy (N= 2,944), and those younger than 67 years who died during the study period (N=111,643) were excluded. Furthermore, the cohort was further restricted to those with continuous fee-for-service Medicare Part A and Part B enrollment during the entire study period (N=101,302). To reduce the misclassification bias, individuals with newly diagnosed conditions during the precancer and postcancer periods (N=40,544) were excluded. After excluding individuals with missing information on race/ethnicity, county, and in situ, unknown, and advanced cancer stage, the final study cohort comprised 57,589 elderly men with incident prostate cancer (Figure 2).

Key Dependent Variable
Noncancer Hospitalizations: Inpatient admissions during the precancer and postcancer periods were derived from the MEDPAR file. Hospitalizations with the primary diagnosis of prostate cancer were considered 
prostate cancer–related hospitalizations and were excluded from the analysis.4 Although this approach is commonly used in published studies to identify disease-specific hospitalizations,11,12 the challenges in measuring the NCH should also be noted. Elderly men with prostate cancer may have hospitalizations due to cancer-related complications such as bowel, sexual, or urinary dysfunction or cancer-related procedures such as surgery. Therefore, NCHs were considered any admission to an inpatient facility with a principal diagnosis for conditions other than prostate cancer or hospitalizations for causes other than cancer-related complications, such as bowel, sexual, and urinary dysfunctions or primary or treatment-related procedure codes for cancer-related procedures. The details of the codes used to identify the cancer-related complications and procedures are listed in eAppendices 1 and 2 (available with this article at JNCCN.org).
Independent Variables: Our study used the widely known Andersen's Behavioral Model of Health Services Use (ABM) to identify the potential independent factors associated with NCHs in our study population.13 The ABM and adapted versions of this model have been extensively used in health services research to study the factors associated with health care service use and health care outcomes. The ABM states that the use of health care services is determined by individual and contextual determinants, which can be categorized into 4 groups: (1) predisposing factors, (2) enabling factors, (3) external environment factors, and (4) need factors (Figure 3).

Predisposing Factors: These factors represent the unique feature of individuals who tend to engage more or less use of health care services. Age, race/ethnicity, and marital status were the predisposing characteristics. Age at the time of diagnosis (67–74 years, ≥75 years), race/ethnicity (White, African American, Hispanic, and other), and marital status (married, divorced/separated, unmarried, and others) were identified from the Patient Entitlement and Diagnosis Summary File (PEDSF).

Enabling Factors: These factors serve as conditions that enable individuals to use health care services. Income, education, access to care, and the initial cancer treatment were the enabling factors. The PEDSF file provides 2000 Census information on education level and median income. Access to care was measured with at least one visit to a primary care provider during the baseline period.14 Receipt of active treatment was identified using inpatient, outpatient, and carrier files with appropriate International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) diagnostic and procedure codes; Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) or Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) codes; or revenue center code within the 6 months after the index date (eAppendix 1).15–17 We classified the cancer treatment into 4 groups based on a hierarchy: (1) radical prostatectomy (RP), (2) radiation therapy (RT), (3) hormone therapy, and (4) none of these therapies.

External Environment Factors: These factors facilitate the use of health care services related to the structure of services in the geographic areas near the individuals. External environment characteristics comprised the individual's region (Northeast, South, North-Central, and West) and county-level health care resources, such as radiation oncology units and urology units.18 County-level health care resources were measured by the number of radiation oncology and urology units, which were derived from the Area Health Resource Files (AHRF). For the purposes of our analyses, we categorized 
the number of radiation oncology and urology units into 4 groups using quartiles.
Need Factors: These factors require the need to use health care services at the individual level. We classified the common types of chronic conditions using the organ domains.19 We selected this approach because of the synergism in treatment and self-management approaches. For example, the management of cardiometabolic conditions, such as diabetes and heart disease, have similar treatment and self-management strategies. Among men with prostate cancer, cardiometabolic diseases, respiratory diseases (eg, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma), and mental health conditions (eg, depression, other mental conditions) are commonly reported. These common chronic conditions were classified into 7 mutually exclusive categories: (1) cardiometabolic conditions only, (2) mental health conditions only, (3) respiratory conditions only, (4) cardiometabolic and mental health conditions, (5) cardiometabolic and respiratory conditions, (6) all 3 chronic conditions, and (7) none of these chronic conditions. However, because of insufficient numbers for the category “respiratory and mental health conditions,” this category was excluded from analysis.

All of the chronic conditions were identified during the baseline period using 1 inpatient claim or 2 outpatient claims for each of the chronic conditions listed in eAppendix 3. A very small percentage of men (<5%) had chronic conditions other than the cardiometabolic, mental health, and respiratory conditions; 42 other conditions were derived using the list of chronic conditions from published literature.1 We calculated the total number of other chronic conditions during the baseline period and categorized these as “zero or one condition” and “two or more conditions.” The AJCC TNM classification system was used for prostate cancer staging. The cohort was restricted to elderly men with no-node-positive or nonmetastatic prostate cancer. Three groups of cancer stage at diagnosis were defined as T1 or less, T2, and T3 or T4.

Statistical Analyses
Because the NCHs were measured repeatedly during each of the 6 periods, the observations were no longer independent and were correlated. To account for correlated data, we used a statistical approach suggested by Liang et al,20 which involves using the generalized estimating equations (GEE) with the specific correlation matrix. The general form of the model is given in the following equation:
FD1VIEW EXPANDED
where pij denotes the probability of NCHs for individual i, in period j. Timeij denotes a specific period j for individual, i. CCi denotes presence of particular types of chronic conditions at baseline period for individual, i. The model also included other independent variables, such as predisposing, enabling, need, and external environment characteristics measured for individual, i. βs are the regression coefficients to be estimated. We specified 3 types of correlation structures—exchangeable, autoregressive, and unstructured—to control for correlations between repeated observations.21 Because the parameter estimates of the association between NCH and types of chronic conditions remained the same under different correlation structures, only the results from GEE models with exchangeable correlation structures are reported. For ease of interpretation, the predicted probabilities of NCHs between the precancer and postcancer periods were compared. These probabilities were calculated using the parameter estimates from the GEE models, assuming an additive effect.22 Statistical analyses using GEE models were performed using STATA Statistical Software: Release 13 (STATA-13; StataCorp LP, College Station, TX). The predicted probabilities were derived using the “margins” command in STATA-13. The term “risk” is used to describe the results associated with odds ratios (OR). Although the risk ratio and OR will yield different estimates, for events with low prevalence (≤10%),23 such as NCHs, these 2 measures will produce similar results.
Results
Study Population
The study cohort (N=57,489) was primarily white (82.4%), within the age group of 67 to 74 years (58.3%; mean age, 74.6 years; SD, 5.1), and married (68.5%). Most men in the study cohort (80.5%) received treatment for cancer (Table 1).

NCHs During the Precancer and Postcancer Periods
Table 2 reports the rates of NCHs during each of the periods. The rates of NCHs were the highest during the postcancer period (t4; ie, 120 days immediately after the cancer diagnosis) at 5.1% and lowest during the precancer period (t2) at 3.2%, representing an increase of 1.9 percentage points. Among the categories of chronic conditions, the rates of NCHs during the postcancer period were significantly higher compared with the precancer period. Among elderly men with all 3 types of types of chronic conditions, the rates were 20.8% during the postcancer period (t5) and 14.3% during the precancer period (t3), an increase of 6.5 percentage points. Among elderly men with none of the chronic conditions, the rates were 2.6% during the postcancer period (t4) and 1.3% during the precancer period (t1), an increase of 1.3 percentage points. Similar increases were seen for other chronic condition categories.

Table 3 displays the ORs and adjusted ORs and 95% CI using the unadjusted (model 1) and adjusted GEE models (models 2 and 3) on NCHs with exchangeable correlation structures. Model 1 revealed that elderly men were 37% more likely to have NCHs during the postcancer period compared with the precancer period (OR, 1.37; 95% CI, 1.32, 1.41). In model 2, with adjustments for only the types of chronic conditions, elderly men were 38% more likely to have NCHs during the postcancer period (adjusted OR, 1.38; 95% CI, 1.33, 1.42) compared with the precancer period. In model 3, which controlled for all the independent variables, elderly men were 38% more likely to have NCHs during the post-cancer period compared with the precancer period. 
Discussion
To date, this is the only large population-based cohort study to examine the risk of NCHs among elderly men before and after the diagnosis of incident prostate cancer. We observed many noteworthy findings, which have implications for improving management of preexisting chronic conditions among men with incident prostate cancer.

Elderly men with incident prostate cancer had a higher risk of NCHs during the postcancer period compared with the precancer period, even after controlling for a comprehensive list of risk factors. A closer examination of the rates of hospitalizations over 6 periods suggested that the highest rates of NCHs occurred during first 4 months after the cancer diagnosis. There are several plausible explanations for this increased risk. It has been documented that the diagnosis of prostate cancer can trigger psychological distress, anxiety, and suicidal ideations.24 This increase in psychological stress may increase blood levels of epinephrine and norepinephrine, resulting in increased heart rate, blood pressure, and blood sugar levels. In fact, studies have shown that acute psychological stress may stimulate inflammatory markers, such as interleukins, sex hormones, and cortisol levels, which may develop into serious conditions such as heart disease.25 Our findings based on types of chronic conditions showed that patients with cardiometabolic conditions alone or cardiometabolic. 
conditions combined with respiratory or mental health conditions had a greater increase in the risk of NCHs during the postcancer period compared with the precancer period. Previous literature suggests that acute emotional or psychological stress experienced by elderly men with preexisting cardiometabolic conditions may trigger the incidence of another heart failure episode,26,27 leading to hospitalization. It must be noted that the present study did not include newly diagnosed chronic conditions, and therefore increased hospitalizations during the postcancer period for this group may suggest the worsening of preexisting cardiometabolic conditions as a result of prostate cancer diagnosis.
This is one of very few studies to explore the trajectory of noncancer outcomes (ie, hospitalizations) during the precancer and postcancer period among fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries with incident localized prostate cancer using the cancer registry–linked administrative claims data. The study findings reinforce the need for intervention to reduce NCHs among elderly men with incident prostate cancer. Among elderly men with prostate cancer, the risk of NCH was higher during the year after prostate cancer diagnosis compared with the year before. These findings highlight the need for targeted research, program, policy, and intervention efforts to reduce the excess NCHs in this group.

Because appropriate management of preexisting chronic conditions is key to reducing the risk of NCH, effective communication between oncologists and primary care physicians should be facilitated in order to implement an individualized care plan and provide patient education. Elderly men with cardiometabolic conditions alone and those with a combination of cardiometabolic and respiratory or mental health conditions were most vulnerable to an increased risk of NCH. In this regard, optimizing care in the clinical settings by focusing on the “ABCS” (aspirin when appropriate, blood pressure control, cholesterol management, and smoking cessation) can help reduce the risk of NCH.28 A mid-year review by the national Million Hearts initiative, which was launched in 2012, suggests this program has had some success in reducing the risk of NCHs.29 However, the current study's findings need to be interpreted in the context of its limitations. Although due diligence was given in measuring NCHs based on previously published studies, one cannot rule out the possibility that some NCHs may be due to cancer treatment (eg, sepsis due to surgery).

Conclusions
Diagnosis of incident prostate cancer was associated with an increase in the risk of NCHs among elderly men with incident localized prostate cancer. Future research is warranted to examine whether better management strategies for cardiometabolic and other chronic conditions can reduce the increased risk for NCHs after the diagnosis of prostate cancer.

See JNCCN.org for supplemental online content.

The authors have disclosed that they have no financial interests, arrangements, affiliations, or commercial interests with the manufacturers of any products discussed in this article or their competitors.

This project was supported by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) Grant no: R24HS018622-03 and National Institute of General Medical Sciences Grant (U54GM104942). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of AHRQ and NIH.
Women who have inherited a breast cancer mutation are at higher than average risk for developing breast cancer

Between 5 and 10% of all breast cancer cases occur in women with a genetic mutation. Not everyone with the gene will develop breast cancer, but those who inherit it will have a higher risk.

In 1990, researchers discovered the first breast cancer gene, BRCA1, which, when mutated, increases breast cancer risk. (BR is short for breast; CA is short for cancer.) In 1991, researchers discovered a second gene, called BRCA2. Approximately 50 to 90% of hereditary breast cancer cases are caused by mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes (90% of cases from families with hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer and 50% of cases from families with hereditary breast cancer).

It is estimated that about 13.2% of women (13 out of 100 women) in the general population will develop breast cancer in their lifetime. In contrast, it is estimated that about 55 to 65% of women with a BRCA1 mutation and 45% of women with a BRCA2 mutation will develop breast cancer by age 70.

Women who carry a mutation in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene also have an increased risk of developing ovarian cancer. It is estimated that about 1.7 percent (1 to 2 out of 100) of women will develop ovarian cancer in their lifetime. In contrast, it is estimated that about 16 to 60% (16 to 60 out of 100) of women who carry a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation will develop ovarian cancer.

Men who carry a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation are also susceptible to cancer; however, their risks remain less well understood. In women BRCA1 mutations carry the greatest risk; in men it is BRCA2. (Male BRCA1 carriers are also at increased risk of cancer.) The relative risk of developing cancer for male BRCA2 mutation carriers is high before age 65, mostly due to breast, prostate, and pancreatic cancer.

Males who carry BRCA 1mutations have a 1.2% lifetime risk while those who carry BRCA2 mutations have a 6.8% risk.

When a woman or man carries a genetic mutation that leads to an increased risk of breast cancer, there is a 50-50 chance the mutation will be passed on to her or his children. Whether or not the child goes on to develop breast cancer, she or he has a 50-50 chance of passing the mutation on to her or his own children.

In May 2008, the legislature passed and President Bush signed the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA). The law, which went into effect in 2009, makes it illegal for insurance companies to use genetic test results that indicate a person might be at greater risk for developing a certain disease as a reason to deny or cancel health insurance coverage or raise premiums. It also makes it illegal for an employer to use genetic tests results to make decisions on hiring, firing and compensation. As a result, more women may decide that BRCA testing is right for them.

Even with GINA in place, your BRCA test results could affect your eligibility for life insurance, disability insurance or long-term care insurance.

BRCA genetic testing usually costs between $1000 to $2000.  Under the Affordable Care Act, both genetic testing and genetic counselors are covered for qualified individuals as a preventative service without cost-sharing

If you are going to be tested, do it through a genetic counselor. You can get a referral from your gynecologist or primary care doctor, bypassing a genetic counselor but this approach is not recommended. First of all, it may not be appropriate for you to be tested, and given the tendency for family physicians to inappropriately refer patients for testing, you need to be doubly careful.

A genetic counselor can help you learn whether the test should be done, and if it is done, can help you interpret the results. To find such a counselor, you can check with a nearby medical school. You can also call 1-800-FOR CANCER or look at this website which lists genetic counselors for cancer geographically throughout the United States.



Women with a family history of breast cancer are at higher than average risk for developing the disease.

Approximately 25% of women with breast cancer have a family member with the disease. Some of these women carry a BRCA mutation, but most do not. Why these other families are at higher risk is not yet understood. There are probably other inherited genetic mutations that we haven’t yet discovered that are increasing breast cancer risk. It is also possible that there are specific traits or environmental exposures shared by family members that can increase breast cancer risk.

Your risk of developing breast cancer is increased if:

You have two or more relatives with breast or ovarian cancer.
Breast cancer occurs before age 50 in your mother or sister, or a relative (grandmother or aunt) on either side of the family. The risk is higher if your mother or sister has a history of breast cancer.
You have relatives with both breast and ovarian cancer.
You have one or more relatives with two cancers (breast and ovarian, or two different breast cancers).
You have one or more male relatives with breast cancer.
You have a family history of breast or ovarian cancer and Ashkenazi Jewish heritage.
Your family history includes a history of diseases associated with hereditary breast cancer such as Li-Fraumeni or Cowden syndromes.
Women who have a family history of breast cancer that includes relatives who were diagnosed at a young age are at higher risk for breast cancer than are women whose relatives were diagnosed when they were 50 or older. That’s because women who get breast cancer when they are older are less likely to have it occur as a result of an inherited genetic mutation. Instead, they are more likely to have had their cancer triggered by environmental factors. (This is what triggers breast cancer in most women.) By environmental factors, we don’t necessarily mean pollution, but any molecule in the cell’s environment. These molecules may already be circulating inside the body, like hormones, or they may have entered the body from outside in substances that are swallowed or inhaled.

Having a family history of breast cancer does not mean that you will develop breast cancer. But it does mean that you are at increased risk. Having one first-degree relative (mother, sister, or daughter) with breast cancer approximately doubles a woman’s risk. Think of it this way: In a group of 100 women who do not have a family history of breast cancer, five would be expected to go on to develop breast cancer. In contrast, in a group of women with one first-degree relative who has the disease, 10 would be expected to go on to develop breast cancer. Having two first-degree relatives increases a woman’s risk five-fold. This means that in a group of 100 women with two first-degree relatives with breast cancer, 25 would be expected to go on to develop breast cancer.

Women who have a Gail risk score of 1.66 or higher have a higher than average risk for developing breast cancer.

The Gail Model is one of the models developed to quantify a woman’s risk of developing breast cancer. The model incorporates a series of questions related to breast cancer risk factors. Answers to the questions are calculated into a Gail risk score. A woman’s risk is considered low if her five-year risk of developing breast cancer is less than 1.6%; it is considered high if she scores above 1.66%. (All women who are over 60 have a score of at least 1.66 and are considered high risk, based on the Gail Model.) Women who score high on the test are encouraged to have increased surveillance and to consider breast cancer risk-reduction options.

The Gail Model is often used in research studies to evaluate which women are at high risk for developing breast cancer. Yet there are real concerns about the Gail Model’s ability to predict risk in populations other than white US women (and even among these women it has accuracy problems).

To assess your own risk, you can use the National Cancer Institute’s Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool











Human papillomavirus is a nonenveloped, double-stranded DNA virus. Its genome is enclosed in a capsid shell involving major and minor structural proteins (L1 and L2, respectively). It is predominantly spread through sexual contact. There are over 100 subtypes of HPV and the virus is found in 99.7% of women with cervical cancer. HPV types 16 and 18 cause over 70% of cervical cancer.

Once HPV enters the host, it develops an infection in the intraepithelial layer of the mucosa (Figure 2). Although 50% of patients develop serum antibodies, the antibodies are not effective unless they target the L1 protein. Seroconversion occurs in approximately 8 to 12 months. Once infected, the cells can develop precancerous properties that lead to cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) or adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS). Untreated, CIN grade II/III and AIS can develop into squamous cell carcinoma or adenocarcinoma, respectively
In Western nations, the cytologybased Papanicolaou test and HPV DNA tests are used for diagnosing precancerous and cancerous cells. Subsequent follow-up involves the use of colposcopy to evaluate the cervix and obtain tissue samples for biopsy. As a result, developed nations have seen a major decline in cervical cancer deaths. In contrast, women in low-resource settings are not benefiting from these technological advances. The screening and diagnosis of cervical cancer is a challenge given the lack of funding, infrastructure, and trained pathologists. As a result, other innovative approaches that are affordable, efficient, and effective have been studied in an attempt to improve cervical cancer outcome in developing nations
Because cervical cancer is caused by a sexually transmitted virus, the risk factors are the same as other sexually transmitted infections: early age at first sexual activity, multiple sexual partners, early age at first delivery, increased number of pregnancies, smoking, immunosuppression (eg, human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] or medication), and long-term oral contraceptive use. Preventive health measures should ensure education on safe sexual behavior. However, in some regions, social customs can place women at an increased risk of contracting HPV; it has become endemic in regions that support child marriages, polygamy, high parity, and long-term oral contraceptive use. Women are at high risk of cervical cancer if they are of low socioeconomic status, have poor access to health care, and have husbands with a history of multiple sexual partners.9–13 The low status of women and their lack of empowerment play a significant role in the high rate of cervical cancer. These factors impose challenges on health providers who seek to educate, and on the women themselves, who may hesitate to seek adequate health care.
Studies are proving that screen-and-treat programs are effective. The steps are simple: women are initially counseled regarding the risks and benefits of screen-and-treat programs. They undergo a speculum examination, and acetic acid (3%–5%) is applied to the cervix. The cervix is visually inspected (at times with only a flashlight). If acetowhite lesions are noted, the findings are discussed with the patient and she is offered immediate treatment with cryotherapy. Visual inspection with acetic acid (VIA) has a sensitivity of 77% and a specificity of 86%.

A study in Thailand recruited 5999 women, of whom 789 (13.3%) tested positive after VIA; 738 (92.5%) agreed to undergo cryotherapy. There was a very high correlation between the VIA findings of nurses and gynecologists (92%) and their decision to treat (93%), which demonstrated the ease with which health providers could be trained to perform the screen-andtreat technique.3 Another study randomized clusters into VIA and control groups (standard care) in India. Those who tested positive underwent colposcopy, directed biopsy, and cryotherapy by nurses during the same visit. Of the 31,343 who underwent VIA, 3088 (9.9%) screened positive, 3052 had colposcopy (9.7%), and 2539 (8.1%) had directed biopsies. There were 97 and 1303 deaths in the VIA group and the control group, respectively. There was a significant decline in cervical burden detected within 5 to 7 years. The study stressed the impracticality of multiple visits for diagnosis and treatment and that a single VIA screening could effectively reduce cervical cancer incidence and death.14

HPV DNA Testing
A recent study compared HPV DNA testing, cytologic testing, VIA, and standard care on the incidence of cervical cancer in India. Of the 131,749 eligible women in this study, the HPV-tested group showed a significant reduction in the number of advanced cervical cancer and cervical cancer deaths when compared with the standard care group. Interestingly, there was no reduction in advanced cervical cancers or cervical cancer deaths when compared with the control group in either the VIA or the cytologic testing group.15 No cancer deaths were found in HPV-negative women after 8 years. The high negative predictive value indicated that if a woman tested negative, she would not need to be screened for many years. The authors concluded that HPV screening could potentially lower the mortality rate within 5 to 10 years. However, they could not explain the discrepancies between this and their earlier study.14 Trials in Europe and North America have demonstrated that HPV screening is more sensitive at detecting precancerous abnormalities than cytologic testing.16

The HPV DNA test that was used for this study (Hybrid Capture II; Digene Corporation, Gaithersburg, MD) costs $20 to $30 per test. This makes HPV DNA tests unavailable in resourcepoor settings. However, the authors stated that a “simple, affordable, and accurate” HPV test with sensitivity of 90.2% and specificity of 84.2% was expected to be commercially available. This test (careHPV, Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands) will run on batteries and does not require water or refrigeration. It may cost $5 or less and produces results in 3 hours, enabling treatment during a single visit.17 This technique, if affordable, would not only make a significant impact on disease burden, but might be more preferable to women themselves. For women who are concerned about male providers or are simply nervous about pelvic examinations, performing their own vaginal swabs might encourage them to come to health centers and thus increase the number of women screened.
In June 2006, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the Gardasil® vaccine (Merck & Co., Inc., Whitehouse Station, NJ), which provides 100% protection against HPV type 16 and 18, and protects against HPV type 6 and 11. Bivalent Cervarix ® (GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC) against HPV type 16 and 18 was first licensed in 2007 and was initially approved only in Europe. In October 2009, the FDA approved its use in the United States. Studies show that Cervarix is 93% effective in preventing cervical precancerous changes. Both vaccines require a series of 3 0.5-mL intramuscular injections. The vaccines form virus-like particles, are noninfectious, and are designed for prophylaxis only. Western nations have been tackling questions that address who requires the vaccine and at what age girls should receive it. The US Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends that girls and women between the ages of 9 and 26 years should receive the quadrivalent vaccine. The WHO position paper on the HPV vaccine recommends that it should be a part of national immunization programs. WHO recommends the vaccine be given between the ages of 9 and 13 years, prior to a girl’s first coitus. However, they acknowledged nationwide administration of HPV vaccine would only be cost effective in countries that have high gross domestic products.2

Gardasil costs approximately $90 per dose ($270 for 3 doses). Several models have calculated that vaccinating girls in resource-poor settings would be cost effective only if the 3-dose vaccine (including vaccination delivery and education) was between $10 and $25.18 Tiered pricing with the help of WHO, international organizations, and other funding sources might make this possible. However, the HPV vaccine is not an immediate panacea. Even if the vaccine were affordable and widely available in resource-poor settings, the rate of cervical cancer would not decline for decades as a result of the latency phase between infection and cancer.
In June 2006, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the Gardasil® vaccine (Merck & Co., Inc., Whitehouse Station, NJ), which provides 100% protection against HPV type 16 and 18, and protects against HPV type 6 and 11. Bivalent Cervarix ® (GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC) against HPV type 16 and 18 was first licensed in 2007 and was initially approved only in Europe. In October 2009, the FDA approved its use in the United States. Studies show that Cervarix is 93% effective in preventing cervical precancerous changes. Both vaccines require a series of 3 0.5-mL intramuscular injections. The vaccines form virus-like particles, are noninfectious, and are designed for prophylaxis only. Western nations have been tackling questions that address who requires the vaccine and at what age girls should receive it. The US Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends that girls and women between the ages of 9 and 26 years should receive the quadrivalent vaccine. The WHO position paper on the HPV vaccine recommends that it should be a part of national immunization programs. WHO recommends the vaccine be given between the ages of 9 and 13 years, prior to a girl’s first coitus. However, they acknowledged nationwide administration of HPV vaccine would only be cost effective in countries that have high gross domestic products.2

Gardasil costs approximately $90 per dose ($270 for 3 doses). Several models have calculated that vaccinating girls in resource-poor settings would be cost effective only if the 3-dose vaccine (including vaccination delivery and education) was between $10 and $25.18 Tiered pricing with the help of WHO, international organizations, and other funding sources might make this possible. However, the HPV vaccine is not an immediate panacea. Even if the vaccine were affordable and widely available in resource-poor settings, the rate of cervical cancer would not decline for decades as a result of the latency phase between infection and cancer.
Cervical cancer continues to be listed among the top gynecologic cancers worldwide. According to current data, it is ranked fourteenth among all cancers and fourth-ranked cancer among women worldwide.[1] Cervical cancer intervention focuses on primary and secondary prevention. [2] Primary prevention and screening is the best method to decrease the burden of cervical cancer and to decrease mortality. In the United States and other developing countries, most screening and diagnostic efforts are directed towards early identification of high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) lesions through HPV testing and Pap smears. Although HPV testing is not recommended in women younger than 30 years of age, low-risk younger women should begin screening with Pap tests at age 21 and continue until age 65, according to the United States Preventive Services Task Force recommendations. Newer recommendations offer 3 to 5-year intervals between screening based on prior results and the use of pap and HPV co-testing. [3][4] Since cervical cancer is a sexually transmitted infection, it is a preventable disease. Targeted education, screening, and intervention can reduce the burden of disease. Like many diseases and cancers, disparities exist in screening rates, early diagnosis, and timely treatment. Screening rates tend to be less in low socioeconomic and low resource areas with ethnic and age variations. Studies show that women with obesity and chronic disease may also have lower rates of cervical and breast cancer screening. A study on ethnic minority women in the United Kingdom reports several barriers to screening including lack of awareness, fear, embarrassment, and shame, and low perceived risk.[5] One study reviewing the barriers for Haitian women revealed socioeconomic barriers, language barriers, and limited understanding of health and disease. [6]  In the United States, cervical cancer mortality is disproportionately higher for African American women. Since 2006, vaccination has been available for the prevention of cervical cancer. Vaccination can improve cancer death rates in underdeveloped countries where resources may not be available for routine screening and in populations with higher mortality rates.
Current literature reports that Human papillomavirus (HPV) is found in the majority of sexually active people at some point during their life. There are more than 130 types of known HPV with 20 HPV types identified as cancer-related. HPV-related cervical dysplasia rates are only known in women since men are not screened outside of research protocols. HPV 16 and 18 are the most commonly found HPV in invasive cervical cancer. Population-based HPV prevalence studies show that the greatest prevalence of high-risk HPV occurs in the young adult period before 25 years of life and cervical cancer death peaks in the middle age period of 40 to 50 years of life. Studies have shown that HPV-related cervical disease in women younger than 25 years old is largely self-limiting. However, those with co-infection may be less likely to have spontaneous clearance and progress to cancer. Risks factors for HPV and cervical cancer include age at first intercourse, multiple sexual partners, smoking, herpes simplex, HIV, co-infection with other genital infections, and oral contraceptive use. HPV is transmitted by skin to skin contact including during sexual intercourse, hand to genital organ contact, and oral sex
Globally, there are more than 500,000 new cases of cervical cancer annually. Approximately 250,000 women die of cervical cancer annually.  In the United States, about 4000 women die from cervical cancer annually with African Americans, Hispanics, and women in low-resource areas having higher disparities in evidenced-based care and a much higher mortality rate.[9][10]HPV, the causative agent is a sexually transmitted viral infection. Cervical cancer mortality is higher among women who have not been screened in the last five years and those women without consistent follow-up post identification of a precancerous lesion. Trends continue to show that women with the highest risk of mortality may be less likely to receive a vaccination that could potentially prevent cervical cancer.
HPV is the causative agent in cervical cancer. More than 75 percent of cases are due to high-risk HPV 16 and 18.[11] Although there are more than a half-million cases of HPV identified annually, most are low-grade infections and will spontaneously resolve within two years. Progression of high-grade lesions and cancer are seen in the presence of other carcinogenic factors such as listed above
The patient with cervical cancer is usually asymptomatic in the early stages. The history and physical must include sexual history including the age of first sexual encounter. Sexual history includes questions about postcoital bleeding and pain during intercourse. The history includes questioning about previous sexually transmitted infections, the number of lifetime partners, previous history of HPV infection, history of human immunodeficiency virus, use of tobacco, and whether the patient has had a previous vaccination against HPV. Women should be asked about menstrual patterns and any abnormal bleeding, persistent vaginal discharges, irritations, or known cervical lesions. The physical exam must include a full evaluation of the external and internal genitalia. In women with cervical cancer, the exam findings might include a friable cervix, lesions, erosions, or bleeding with examination and fixed adnexa
According to the United States Preventative Services Task Force (USPTF), Pap screening is recommended beginning at age 21 years of age. HPV testing begins at age 30 in conjunction with Pap smear cytology. Screening is recommended every three years for women with continued normal screening and those low risk for cervical cancer. For women over 30 years of age, cytology can be every five years with HPV testing. Level A recommendation or women with low-risk status and consistent normal screenings can discontinue cervical cancer cytology and HPV testing at age 65. Women who have had a total abdominal hysterectomy including removal of the cervix for benign disease do not require further screening
Precancerous lesions are managed conservatively for those women younger than 25 years. The majority of abnormal findings in women younger than 25 are low-risk cervical dysplasia and will resolve spontaneously. Colposcopy evaluates persistent, abnormal cytology or lesions suspected to be greater than low risk. These are managed according to findings. Low-risk lesions may be watched and reevaluated more frequently, and high-risk lesions are treated based on size, location, and staging. Cryotherapy or excision is done to manage pre-cancerous lesions that are limited in size and depth. Conization, laser or Loop Electrosurgical Excision Procedure (LEEP) are used in managing those lesions that include the endocervical canal and are more extensive. LEEP may provide better visualization of the squamocolumnar junction and provide the benefit of less bleeding in the outpatient setting. [12] If cancer is diagnosed, the next step in management is staging to determine further treatment. Staging is based on findings and results from examination, tissue findings, imaging, and reported signs and symptoms. Grading is based on the size and depth of cancer and signs of spread to other organs. Treatment of early-stage disease includes a radical hysterectomy. For women who desire pregnancy with early-stage disease, conization may be the initial treatment. Chemotherapy and radiation are usually the next steps in treatment after hysterectomy to slow the growth of cancer.
Evaluating visible cervical lesions for cervical cancer is important. However, most cervical cancer will not present with an overt mass in early stages and as discussed above is asymptomatic. Other possible causes of cervical lesions or abnormal bleeding include sexually transmitted infections, cervical fibroids, endometriosis, and cervical polyps. Diagnosis may require further testing and evaluation of symptoms to determine whether the disease is related to cervical cancer. In some cases, diagnostic biopsy is needed to finalize the diagnosis. Rarely, metastatic cancer may be identified on the uterine cervix during a routine pap smear.
The estimated effectiveness of HPV vaccination is 90 percent. [14] Inconsistent screening is an independent risk factor for the late diagnosis of cervical cancer. [15] The five-year survival rate for cervical cancer can approach 92 percent. The higher stage at presentation decreases survival and increases the chance of recurrence. African American women tend to have the highest mortality and lowest survival rate. The survival rate may be less than 50 percent. Contributing factors to differences in outcomes may include differences in the delivery of evidence-based care, later stage of diagnosis, lymph node spreading, age, and size and invasion of the tumor at the time of diagnosis. Complications of advanced disease and associated treatments are similar to other cancers. Complications may include renal failure, hydronephrosis, pain, lymphedema, bleeding disorder, and fistulas. [17] Rare sequelae may include orbital index and blindness.Both traditional methods of patient education and innovative methods can increase awareness of cervical cancer and the need for prevention and early screening. [19][20] The literature shows that doctors may not be recommending or discussing HPV vaccination with patients. Women and parents also have vaccination fears. In high-risk populations, additional education to physicians may increase awareness, prevention, and screening among those women at risk for the highest mortality.[21]  Although, a patient may prefer health system education from the provider. Additional education including culturally sensitive information, appropriate language to reach low health literacy populations, and targeted efforts to women not yet sexually active are needed to expand patient education and awareness of cervical cancer prevention and screening beyond the clinical setting through community outreach. Primary prevention includes vaccination to prevent cervical cancer. There is a quadrivalent vaccine that prevents not only cervical cancer but also prevents genital warts. The recommended age for vaccination is from 9 to 45 years old for females. It is approved for females ages 9 to 45 and is also recommended for males. Health promotion aimed at vaccination can have a major impact on cervical cancer mortality in women in low resource areas and those who are in high-risk ethnic groups. A vaccine that only covers HPV 16 and 18 is no longer marketed in the United States. However, its use may continue in other areas outside of the United States.The interprofessional team care in the prevention, screening, treatment, and management of cervical cancer can improve awareness, screening, and management of cervical cancer. The use of public education can increase awareness about cervical cancer prevention and screening and the importance of identifying precancerous lesions. [24][25][26] Primary care providers performing cervical cancer screening, colposcopies, and LEEP procedures, must have ongoing dialogues with gynecology about findings, suspicious lesions, outcomes, and management and treatment. Organized protocols and guidelines across the system can lead to better outcomes in increasing awareness, screening, management and treatment, and follow-up. Developing a culturally sensitive system directed at increasing patient-centered education will also require the input of diverse staff and providers with language skills, cultural competency, lab, and nursing.

The interprofessional team can optimize the treatment of patients through communication and coordination of care. Primary care physicians, gynecologists, radiation oncologists, and nurse practitioners provide diagnoses and care plans. Specialty care ambulatory care and oncology nurses should work with the team for coordination of care and are involved in patient education. They should provide feedback to the rest of the team. Pharmacists should evaluate vaccinations, medications prescribed, recognize drug-drug interactions, provide patient education, and monitor compliance. The team can thus improve outcomes for patients with cervical cancer.
Cervical cancer is the second common female malignant tumor globally which seriously threatens female’s health. Persistent infection of high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) has been clarified to be the necessary cause of cervical cancer (1,2). The clear etiology accelerated the establishment and implementation of comprehensive prevention and control system of cervical cancer. In May 2018, the World Health Organization (WHO) issued a call for the elimination of cervical cancer globally, and more than 70 countries and international academic societies acted positively immediately (3-6). Thereafter, in November 17, 2020, WHO released the global strategy to accelerate the elimination of cervical cancer as a public health problem to light the road of cervical cancer prevention and control in future which mean that 194 countries promise together to eliminate cervical cancer for the first time (7). At this milestone time point, we reviewed the update progress of cervical cancer prevention and control in epidemiology, risk factors and screening, in order to pave the way of cervical cancer elimination
Cervical cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer death among women (8). Over the past 30 years, the increasing proportion of young women affected by cervical cancer has ranged from 10% to 40% (9). According to the WHO and International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) estimates, the year 2008 saw 529,000 new cases of cervical cancer globally. In developing countries, the number of new cases of cervical cancer was 452,000 and ranked second among malignancies in female patients (10). Conversely, the number of new cases of cervical cancer was 77,000 in developed countries and ranked tenth among female malignancies.

In 2018 worldwide with an estimated 570,000 cases and 311,000 deaths, cervical cancer ranks as the fourth most frequently diagnosed cancer and the fourth leading cause of cancer death in women (11). However, approximately 85% of the worldwide deaths from cervical cancer occur in underdeveloped or developing countries, and the death rate is 18 times higher in low-income and middle-income countries compared with wealthier countries (12). Cervical cancer ranks second in incidence and mortality behind breast cancer in lower Human Development Index (HDI) settings; however, it is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in 28 countries and the leading cause of cancer death in 42 countries, the vast majority of which are in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Eastern Asia (13). The highest regional incidence and mortality rates are seen in Africa (14). In relative terms, the rates are 7−10 times lower in North America, Australia/New Zealand, and Western Asia (Saudi Arabia and Iraq) (15).

In China, cervical cancer is the second largest female malignant tumor (11). According to the data from National Cancer Center in 2015, there were 98,900 new cases and 30,500 deaths of cervical cancer (16). In the past 20 years, the incidence and mortality of cervical cancer have been increasing gradually in China (17).

Between 2004 and 2007, the Chinese scientific research team, cooperated with WHO/IARC and the Cleveland Medical Center in the United States in 8 rural and urban areas (Xiangyuan county of Shanxi Province, Yangcheng county of Shanxi Province, Xinmi county of Henan Province, Hotan Prefecture of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, Shanghai City, Beijing City, Shenzhen City of Guangdong Province, and Shenyang City of Liaoning Province), carried out a population-based multicenter HPV type distribution study among females aged 15−59 years old, clarifying the dominant HPV types of rural and urban populations in China, as well as female HPV infection status and age distribution (18). Studies have confirmed that persistent infection of high-risk HPV is closely related to the occurrence of cervical cancer. There are 14 types of high-risk HPV, namely HPV16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 68 and 73. A multi-center cross-sectional survey study showed that the infection rate of high-risk HPV in China is about 14.3%, and the dominant types are HPV16 (2.9%), HPV52 (1.7%), HPV58 (1.5%), HPV33 (1%) and HPV18 (0.8%), and showed double peaks during adolescence and perimenopause (19). Globally, HPV16 has the highest infection rate, HPV18 is the second most common type, while HPV 33 is common in Asia, and HPV52 and HPV58 have relatively low infection rates. This shows that compared with the global HPV epidemiology, HPV epidemiology in China has both similarities and differences.

Subsequently, the Chinese scientific research team conducted a cross-sectional multi-center cervical cancer and precancerous HPV genotyping study based on 19 hospitals in 7 geographic regions (Northeast China, North China, Northwest China, Central China, East China, Southwest, and South China). Through the pathological laboratory procedures of strict quality control, it was found that the dominant HPV types in cervical cancer tissue were HPV16, 18, 31, 52 and 58, respectively, and that HPV16 and 18 were the most carcinogenic, which could cause more than 84.5% of cervical cancer (20). The above research on HPV dominant types from different perspectives provides solid scientific evidence and support for the future research and application of preventive HPV vaccine and in vitro diagnostic technology, epidemiological research and health economics research in the Chinese population.
A number of risk factors for cervical cancer are linked to exposure to the HPV (21,22). Invasive cancer development process could prolong up to 20 years from the precursor lesion caused by sexually transmitted HPV (23). However, there are also other numerous risk factors (such as reproductive and sexual factors, behavioral factors, etc) for cervical cancers which include sexual intercourse at a young age (<16 years old), multiple sexual partners, smoking, high parity and low socio-economic level 
HPV The primary cause of pre-cancerous and cancerous cervical lesions is infection with a high-risk or oncogenic HPV types. Most cases of cervical cancer occur as a result of infection with HPV16 and 18. High-risk types, especially HPV16, are found to be highly prevalent in human populations (22). The infection is usually transmitted by sexual contact, causing squamous intraepithelial lesions. Most lesions disappear after 6−12 months due to immunological intervention. However, a small percentage of these lesions remain and can cause cancer.
The results of a meta-analysis showed that the highest prevalence of HPV occurs at the age of 25 years, which could be related to changes in sexual behavior (26). In a meta-analysis study, the bimodal distribution of cervical cancer in some regions has been studied. In this distribution, immediately after sexual intercourse, an outbreak of HPV can be observed, which is followed by a plateau at adult age; the second peak again is observed after 45 years old (27). Permanent infection with one of the high-risk types of HPV over time leads to the development of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). The major mechanisms through which HPV contributes to carcinogenesis involve the activity of two viral oncoproteins, E6 and E7, which interfere with major tumor suppressor genes, P53 and retinoblastoma. In addition, E6 and E7 are associated with changes in host DNA and virus DNA methylation. Interactions of E6 and E7 with cellular proteins and DNA methylation modifications are associated with changes in key cellular pathways that regulate genetic integrity, cell adhesion, immune response, apoptosis, and cellular control (28).
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) The risk of developing infection from high-risk HPV types is higher in women with HIV (29). The results of the studies on the relationship between HIV and cervical cancer suggested a higher rate of persistent HPV infection with multiple oncogene viruses, more abnormal Papanicolau (Pap) smears, and higher incidence of CIN and invasive cervix carcinoma among people with HIV (23). Women infected with HIV are at increased risk of HPV infection at an early age (13−18 years) and are at high risk of cervical cancer. Compared with non-infected women, HIV positive patients with cervical cancer are diagnosed at an earlier age (15−49 years old) (30).
Reproductive and sexual factors
Sexual partners Factors relating to sexual behavior have also been linked to cervical cancer. One study found that an increased risk of cervical cancer is observed in people with multiple sexual partners (31). Moreover, many studies have also suggested that women with multiple sexual partners are at high risk for HPV acquisition and cervical cancer (32,33). From the meta-analysis, a significant increased risk of cervical diseases was observed in individuals with multiple sexual partners compared to individuals with few partners, both in non-malignant cervical disease and in cervical cancer (34). The association remained exist even after controlling for the status of HPV infection, which is a major cause of cervical cancer. Also, early age at first intercourse is a risk factor for cervical cancer (35).
Oral contraceptive (OC) pills OC pills are known to be a risk factor for cervical cancer. In an international collaborative epidemiological study of cervical cancer, the relative risk in current users increased with an increase in the duration of OC use. It has been reported that the use of OC for 5 years or more can double the risk of cancer (36). And in a multi-center case-control study, among women who tested positive for HPV DNA, the risk of cervical cancer increased by 3 times if they have used OC pills for 5 years or more (37). In addition, a recent systematic review & meta-analysis also suggested that OC pills use had a definite associated risk for developing cervical cancer especially for adenocarcinoma. This study concluded that use of OC pills is an independent risk factor in causing cervical cancer
With the background of cervical cancer elimination worldwide, cervical cancer screening plays an increased role in the comprehensive prevention and control besides HPV vaccination, especially those methods that demonstrated excellent clinical performance.The screening methods for cervical cancer are mainly as following: traditional Pap smear, visual inspection with acetic acid & Lugol’s iodine (VIA/VILI), liquid-based cytology (LBC) and HPV testing. The disease burden of cervical cancer has been significantly reduced in developed countries by Pap smear, mainly in the United States, since 1950s. However, the accuracy of traditional Pap smear could be easily affected by following factors: the level of cytological room, professional technicians, sampling method, slide quality, dyeing skills, and cytological personnel experience. In developed countries with high standard experimental conditions and technical level, the sensitivity of cytology is as high as 80%−90%, in contrast, in resource-limited regions, it could be as low as 30%−40%. To overcome the limitations of traditional Pap smear in cervical cancer screening, LBC was developed and approved by Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1996 for clinical-use purpose. Compared with the traditional Pap smear, the sensitivity of LBC was significantly improved. Meanwhile, organized and practicable LBC screening program has also been established in developed countries which could ensure cervical cancer screening strategy is carried out continuously and effectively.

Cervical cancer screening has been facilitated since the cause clarified. HPV-based testing is a pivotal part for cervical cancer screening besides cytology-based tests.

The detection of high-risk HPV in cervical lesion biopsies and exfoliated cells has evolved from restriction endonuclease cleavage patterns and hybridization techniques to polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based system (39) and most recently next-generation sequencing (NGS) assays (40). Currently, HPV genotyping is primarily based on the detection of individual types by various methods that utilizing the highly conserved L1 gene and PCR-based methods. These PCR methods employed consensus primers that could target and amplify different sized fragments such as 455 bp with the MY09/11|PGMY system (41), 150 bp with the GP5+/6+ system (42), or <100 bp with SPF10 ( 43). And another point that is worth noting is that all these techniques remained the most validated methodology to identify and characterize clinically relevant HPV (44-46).

Additionally, the type-specific probes are always to be used to achieve HPV genotyping, besides DNA sequencing (46,47). Other types of assays may be type-specific with immediate discrimination and quantitation of specific HPV types in an “onetube” assay. These methods employ real-time (RT)-PCR techniques, coupled with beta-globin detection for internal quality control utilizing specialized detection systems (48).

Cervical cancer malignant pathways are tightly correlated to the viral E6 and E7 oncoprotein activities which could also contribute to the accumulation of cellular genomic mutations and viral integration (47). Therefore, identification of HPV E6/E7 mRNA has been shown to be promising in cervical cancer screening. And most of the assays utilized reverse transcriptase PCR or nucleic acid sequence-based amplification to identify E6/E7 genome fragments (49).

Recently, the correlation between increased HPV CpG site methylation levels and high-grade cervical lesions has also been demonstrated in numerous studies and has facilitated the development of quantitative assays targeted CpG methylation (50,51).. Studies indicate that NGS assays can provide single-molecule CpG methylation levels to help unravel the mechanism of methylation in cervical cancer development (39,50).

The application of HPV detection has accelerated the transition of cervical cancer screening from morphology to molecular biology. HPV testing was initially used as a triage method for the reflex triage of population with atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance (ASC-US). In 2014, FDA approved HPV detection for the use in cervical screening. Thereafter, HPV detection plays an increasingly important role in the practice of cervical cancer screening. At present, more than 425 HPV testing has been developed worldwide, of which more than 150 is from China. To restrict and standardize HPV testing market, China released guidelines for the clinical performance evaluation for HPV testing against clinical endpoints in 2015. In other countries, it is also necessary to set similar regulations in consideration that 59.7% of HPV tests on the global market without a single peer-reviewed publication (49). To improve the coverage of cervical cancer screening, HPV testing that is rapid, simple, inexpensive could be more popular and can further promote the application in practice. In 2008, careHPV was developed in China, which demonstrated excellent performance in screening, although it was easy to use, cheap, fast and friendly to the laboratory requirements (52,53). In 2018, the careHPV achieved the pre-qualification certification issued by WHO, which was expected to benefit more people in developing countries and resource-poor areas such as Africa and Southeast Asia (54). In addition, the cost-effective reflex triage, referral of women, and management strategies appropriate to various resource level areas were also in evaluation (55-58).

In recent years, with the rapid development of science and technology, the application of artificial intelligence (AI) based products is booming. In cervical cancer prevention and control, AI also showed to be promising in cytology-based screening and colposcopy examination based on the image pattern recognition (59,60). These AI-based technology or system can intelligently identify lesions and assist medical staff in clinical examination and diagnosis which could alleviate difficulties in diagnosis in primary clinics.

Screening practice in China
In China, cervical cancer screening started since 1990s, although late compared with Western countries, China still achieved great breakthroughs. Common screening methods were introduced into China for the first time after clinical performance evaluation in high-risk areas which included HPV DNA detection (Hybrid Capture II, HC2), LBC and visual inspection with VIA/VILI (61-63). At the same time, these studies also further made it clear that “one or more HPV tests in a lifetime for cervical cancer screening could be feasible in developing countries” which had important impact on the clinical practice of cervical cancer screening in China and even in the world.

In July 2019, the State Council issued the “Healthy China Action (2019−2030)” plan, emphasizing the need to move forward the diagnosis and treatment and optimize the allocation of medical resources, from the treatment-centered to the health-centered, and to improve health level of the whole people. The program also clearly points out that cervical cancer screening coverage rate needs to reach more than 80% by 2030 (64), indicating the importance and severity of cervical cancer prevention and control.

Finally, the achievements of scientific research should be able to be developed into products and applied in practice. Based on the experience and study findings, two “National Demonstration Base for Early Diagnosis and Treatment of Cervical Cancer” were set up in Shenzhen Maternal and Child Health Hospital (City type) and Xiangyuan Maternal and Child Health Hospital (Rural type) in Shanxi Province in February 2005 (65). Thereafter, National Health and Family Planning Commission of China and China Women’s Federation launched cervical cancer and breast cancer screening program for women aged 35−64 years old in rural areas in 2009 (66), which was also one of the major public health service projects in China organized by national government. Different screening and management strategies have been set up for various resource-level regions. Up to 2017, the project has offered cervical cancer screening for 73.99 million women. Currently, the project has covered 1,501 counties (67). Meanwhile, China has developed effective cervical cancer prevention and control network which covered screening, diagnosis to treatment, follow-up and rehabilitation step by integrating government support and leadership, multi-sectors’ cooperation, professional personnel support and whole society participation. In 2017, Chinese Preventive Medicine Association released the “Guideline for Comprehensive Prevention and Control of Cervical Cancer” to further promote the standardized and development of cervical cancer prevention and control in China (68).

The priority of public health measures for cancer prevention and control reflects the government and society’s attention to public’s health, especially in resource-limited areas, and also reflects the civilization and progress of a country and society.

A large number of studies around the world have confirmed that cervical cancer could be prevented and controlled well by screening and early treatment. And it has been widely recognized if only considering the effect of cancer screening. However, the screening methods or solutions with the best effect may be not the best one. In the case of limited health resources, it is necessary to analyze and compare the input and output of different programs from the perspective of health economics which included how to scientifically determine the initial age of screening and time interval, select appropriate screening programs according to local health resources, and focus on cancer intervention in order to maximize the use of limited health resources. And then, we could determine the screening solution that not only has a good effect of disease prevention and control, but also is in line with the principle of cost-effectiveness.The disease burden of cervical cancer has decreased significantly in developed countries and regions in last decades, however it is still serious in less developed countries and regions, and effective preventive measures in these areas still face serious challenges. At present, there are various available prevention and control measures that are cost-effective and scientific evidence-based to meet the needs of areas with different economic levels. It is gratifying to note that the globe has achieved a strategic consensus on the elimination of cervical cancer and also has developed and released the global strategy to accelerate the elimination of cervical cancer. Although the global elimination of cervical cancer has a long way to go, it is believed that through large-scale continuous promotion and widely use of existing effective prevention and control measures, cervical cancer will become the first cancer eliminated by human beings
Each year, more than half a million women are diagnosed with cervical cancer and the disease results in over 300 000 deaths worldwide. High-risk subtypes of the human papilloma virus (HPV) are the cause of the disease in most cases. The disease is largely preventable. Approximately 90% of cervical cancers occur in low-income and middle-income countries that lack organised screening and HPV vaccination programmes. In high-income countries, cervical cancer incidence and mortality have more than halved over the past 30 years since the introduction of formal screening programmes. Treatment depends on disease extent at diagnosis and locally available resources, and might involve radical hysterectomy or chemoradiation, or a combination of both. Conservative, fertility-preserving surgical procedures have become standard of care for women with low-risk, early-stage disease. Advances in radiotherapy technology, such as intensity-modulated radiotherapy, have resulted in less treatment-related toxicity for women with locally-advanced disease. For women with metastatic or recurrent disease, the overall prognosis remains poor; nevertheless, the incorporation of the anti-VEGF agent bevacizumab has been able to extend overall survival beyond 12 months. Preliminary results of novel immunotherapeutic approaches, similarly to other solid tumours, have shown promising results so far
Background: Cervical cancer is the second commonest cancer among women up to 65 years of age and is the most frequent cause of death from gynaecological cancers worldwide. Sources suggest that a very high proportion of new cervical cancer cases in developing countries are at an advanced stage (IB2 or more) and more than a half of these may be stage III or IV. Cervical cancer staging is based on findings from clinical examination (FIGO) staging). Standard care in Europe and US for stage IB2 to III is non-surgical treatment (chemoradiation). However in developing countries, where there is limited access to radiotherapy, locally advanced cervical cancer may be treated with a combination of chemotherapy and hysterectomy (surgery to remove the womb and the neck of the womb, with or without the surrounding tissues). It is not certain if this improves survival. Therefore, it is important to systematically assess the value of hysterectomy in addition to radiotherapy or chemotherapy, or both, as an alternative intervention in the treatment of locally advanced cervical cancer (stage IB2 to III).

Objectives: To determine whether hysterectomy, in addition to standard treatment with radiation or chemotherapy, or both, in women with locally advanced cervical cancer (stage IB2 to III) is safe and effective compared with standard treatment alone.

Search methods: We searched the Cochrane Gynaecological Cancer Group Trials Register, CENTRAL, MEDLINE, EMBASE and LILACS up to February 2014. We also searched registers of clinical trials, abstracts of scientific meetings and reference lists of included studies.

Selection criteria: We searched for randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that compared treatment protocols involving hysterectomy versus radiotherapy or chemotherapy, or both, in women with advanced stage (IB2 to III) cervical cancer presenting for the first time.

Data collection and analysis: We assessed study eligibility independently, extracted data and assessed risk of bias. Where possible, overall and progression or disease-free survival outcomes were synthesised in a meta-analysis using the random-effects model. Adverse events were incompletely reported so results of single trials were described in narrative form.

Main results: We included seven RCTs (1217 women) of varying methodological quality in the review; most trials were at moderate or high risk of bias.Three were multi-centre trials, two were single-centre trials, and in two trials it was unclear if they were single or multi-centre. These trials compared the following interventions for women with locally advanced cervical cancer (stages IB2 to III):hysterectomy (simple or radical) with radiotherapy (N = 194) versus radiotherapy alone (N = 180); hysterectomy (simple or radical) with chemoradiotherapy (N = 31) versus chemoradiotherapy alone (N = 30); hysterectomy (radical) with chemoradiotherapy (N = 111) versus internal radiotherapy with chemoradiotherapy (N = 100); hysterectomy (simple or radical) with upfront (neoadjuvant) chemotherapy (N = 298) versus radiotherapy alone (N = 273).One trial (N = 256) found no difference in the risk of death or disease progression between women who received attenuated radiotherapy followed by hysterectomy and those who received radiotherapy (external and internal) alone (hazard ratio (HR) 0.89, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.61 to 1.29). This trial also reported no difference between the two groups in terms of adverse effects (18/129 grade 3 or 4 adverse effects in the hysterectomy and radiation group and 19 cases in 18/121 women in the radiotherapy alone group). There was no difference in 5-year tumour-free actuarial survival (representation of the probable years of survivorship of a defined population of participants) or severe complications (grade 3) in another trial (N = 118) which reported the same comparison (6/62 versus 6/56 in the radiation with surgery group versus the radiotherapy alone group, respectively). The quality of the evidence was low for all these outcomes.One trial (N = 61) reported no difference (P value > 0.10) in overall and recurrence-free survival at 3 years between chemoradiotherapy and hysterectomy versus chemoradiotherapy alone (low quality evidence). Adverse events and morbidity data were not reported.Similarly, another trial (N = 211) found no difference in the risk of death (HR 0.65, 95% CI 0.35 to 1.21, P value = 0.19, low quality evidence), disease progression (HR 0.70, 95% CI 0.31 to 1.34, P value = 0.24, low quality evidence) or severe late complications (P value = 0.53, low quality evidence) between women who received internal radiotherapy versus hysterectomy after both groups had received external-beam chemoradiotherapy.Meta analysis of three trials of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and hysterectomy versus radiotherapy alone, assessing 571 participants, found that women who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy plus hysterectomy had less risk of death than those who received radiotherapy alone (HR 0.71, 95% CI 0.55 to 0.93, I(2) = 0%, moderate quality evidence). However, a significant number of the participants that received neoadjuvant chemotherapy plus hysterectomy had radiotherapy as well. There was no difference in the proportion of women with disease progression or recurrence between the two groups (RR 0.75, 95% CI 0.53 to 1.05, I(2) = 20%, moderate quality evidence).Results of single trials reported no apparent (P value > 0.05) difference in long-term severe complications, grade 3 acute toxicity and severe late toxicity between the two groups (low quality evidence).Quality of life outcomes were not reported in any of the trials.

Authors' conclusions: From the available RCTs, we found insufficient evidence that hysterectomy with radiotherapy, with or without chemotherapy, improves the survival of women with locally advanced cervical cancer who are treated with radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy alone. The overall quality of the evidence was variable across the different outcomes and was universally downgraded due to concerns about risk of bias. The quality of the evidence for neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radical hysterectomy versus radiotherapy alone for survival outcomes was moderate, with evidence from other comparisons of low quality. This was mainly based on poor reporting and sparseness of data where results were based on single trials. More trials that assess medical management with and without hysterectomy may test the robustness of the findings of this review as further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect.
Cancer is a broad term. It describes the disease that results when cellular changes cause the uncontrolled growth and division of cells.

Some types of cancer cause rapid cell growth, while others cause cells to grow and divide at a slower rate.

Certain forms of cancer result in visible growths called tumors, while others, such as leukemia, do not.

Most of the body’s cells have specific functions and fixed lifespans. While it may sound like a bad thing, cell death is part of a natural and beneficial phenomenon called apoptosis.

A cell receives instructions to die so that the body can replace it with a newer cell that functions better. Cancerous cells lack the components that instruct them to stop dividing and to die.

As a result, they build up in the body, using oxygen and nutrients that would usually nourish other cells. Cancerous cells can form tumors, impair the immune system and cause other changes that prevent the body from functioning regularly.

Cancerous cells may appear in one area, then spread via the lymph nodes. These are clusters of immune cells located throughout the body.Genetic factors can contribute to the development of cancer.

A person’s genetic code tells their cells when to divide and expire. Changes in the genes can lead to faulty instructions, and cancer can result.

Genes also influence the cells’ production of proteins, and proteins carry many of the instructions for cellular growth and division.

Some genes change proteins that would usually repair damaged cells. This can lead to cancer. If a parent has these genes, they may pass on the altered instructions to their offspring.

Some genetic changes occur after birth, and factors such as smoking and sun exposure can increase the risk.

Other changes that can result in cancer take place in the chemical signals that determine how the body deploys, or “expresses” specific genes.

Finally, a person can inherit a predisposition for a type of cancer. A doctor may refer to this as having a hereditary cancer syndrome. Inherited genetic mutations significantly contribute to the development of 5–10 percentTrusted Source of cancer cases.
Innovative research has fueled the development of new medications and treatment technologies.

Doctors usually prescribe treatments based on the type of cancer, its stage at diagnosis, and the person’s overall health.

Below are examples of approaches to cancer treatment:

Chemotherapy aims to kill cancerous cells with medications that target rapidly dividing cells. The drugs can also help shrink tumors, but the side effects can be severe.
Hormone therapy involves taking medications that change how certain hormones work or interfere with the body’s ability to produce them. When hormones play a significant role, as with prostate and breast cancers, this is a common approach.
Immunotherapy uses medications and other treatments to boost the immune system and encourage it to fight cancerous cells. Two examples of these treatments are checkpoint inhibitors and adoptive cell transfer.
Precision medicine, or personalized medicine, is a newer, developing approach. It involves using genetic testing to determine the best treatments for a person’s particular presentation of cancer. Researchers have yet to show that it can effectively treat all types of cancer, however.
Radiation therapy uses high-dose radiation to kill cancerous cells. Also, a doctor may recommend using radiation to shrink a tumor before surgery or reduce tumor-related symptoms.
Stem cell transplant can be especially beneficial for people with blood-related cancers, such as leukemia or lymphoma. It involves removing cells, such as red or white blood cells, that chemotherapy or radiation has destroyed. Lab technicians then strengthen the cells and put them back into the body.
Surgery is often a part of a treatment plan when a person has a cancerous tumor. Also, a surgeon may remove lymph nodes to reduce or prevent the disease’s spread.
Targeted therapies perform functions within cancerous cells to prevent them from multiplying. They can also boost the immune system. Two examples of these therapies are small-molecule drugs and monoclonal antibodies.
Doctors will often employ more than one type of treatment to maximize effectiveness.
Cancer is a disease in which some of the body’s cells grow uncontrollably and spread to other parts of the body. 

Cancer can start almost anywhere in the human body, which is made up of trillions of cells. Normally, human cells grow and multiply (through a process called cell division) to form new cells as the body needs them. When cells grow old or become damaged, they die, and new cells take their place.

Sometimes this orderly process breaks down, and abnormal or damaged cells grow and multiply when they shouldn’t. These cells may form tumors, which are lumps of tissue. Tumors can be cancerous or not cancerous (benign). 

Cancerous tumors spread into, or invade, nearby tissues and can travel to distant places in the body to form new tumors (a process called metastasis). Cancerous tumors may also be called malignant tumors. Many cancers form solid tumors, but cancers of the blood, such as leukemias, generally do not.

Benign tumors do not spread into, or invade, nearby tissues. When removed, benign tumors usually don’t grow back, whereas cancerous tumors sometimes do. Benign tumors can sometimes be quite large, however. Some can cause serious symptoms or be life threatening, such as benign tumors in the brain.

Differences between Cancer Cells and Normal Cells
Cancer cells differ from normal cells in many ways. For instance, cancer cells:

grow in the absence of signals telling them to grow. Normal cells only grow when they receive such signals. 
ignore signals that normally tell cells to stop dividing or to die (a process known as programmed cell death, or apoptosis).
invade into nearby areas and spread to other areas of the body. Normal cells stop growing when they encounter other cells, and most normal cells do not move around the body. 
tell blood vessels to grow toward tumors.  These blood vessels supply tumors with oxygen and nutrients and remove waste products from tumors.
hide from the immune system. The immune system normally eliminates damaged or abnormal cells. 
trick the immune system into helping cancer cells stay alive and grow. For instance, some cancer cells convince immune cells to protect the tumor instead of attacking it.
accumulate multiple changes in their chromosomes, such as duplications and deletions of chromosome parts. Some cancer cells have double the normal number of chromosomes.
rely on different kinds of nutrients than normal cells. In addition, some cancer cells make energy from nutrients in a different way than most normal cells. This lets cancer cells grow more quickly. Many times, cancer cells rely so heavily on these abnormal behaviors that they can’t survive without them. Researchers have taken advantage of this fact, developing therapies that target the abnormal features of cancer cells. For example, some cancer therapies prevent blood vessels from growing toward tumors, essentially starving the tumor of needed nutrients.Cancer is a genetic disease—that is, it is caused by changes to genes that control the way our cells function, especially how they grow and divide.

Genetic changes that cause cancer can happen because:

of errors that occur as cells divide. 
of damage to DNA caused by harmful substances in the environment, such as the chemicals in tobacco smoke and ultraviolet rays from the sun. (Our Cancer Causes and Prevention section has more information.) 
they were inherited from our parents. 
The body normally eliminates cells with damaged DNA before they turn cancerous. But the body’s ability to do so goes down as we age. This is part of the reason why there is a higher risk of cancer later in life.

Each person’s cancer has a unique combination of genetic changes. As the cancer continues to grow, additional changes will occur. Even within the same tumor, different cells may have different genetic changes
The genetic changes that contribute to cancer tend to affect three main types of genes—proto-oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, and DNA repair genes. These changes are sometimes called “drivers” of cancer.

Proto-oncogenes are involved in normal cell growth and division. However, when these genes are altered in certain ways or are more active than normal, they may become cancer-causing genes (or oncogenes), allowing cells to grow and survive when they should not.

Tumor suppressor genes are also involved in controlling cell growth and division. Cells with certain alterations in tumor suppressor genes may divide in an uncontrolled manner.

DNA repair genes are involved in fixing damaged DNA. Cells with mutations in these genes tend to develop additional mutations in other genes and changes in their chromosomes, such as duplications and deletions of chromosome parts. Together, these mutations may cause the cells to become cancerous.

As scientists have learned more about the molecular changes that lead to cancer, they have found that certain mutations commonly occur in many types of cancer. Now there are many cancer treatments available that target gene mutations found in cancer. A few of these treatments can be used by anyone with a cancer that has the targeted mutation
A cancer that has spread from the place where it first formed to another place in the body is called metastatic cancer. The process by which cancer cells spread to other parts of the body is called metastasis.

Metastatic cancer has the same name and the same type of cancer cells as the original, or primary, cancer. For example, breast cancer that forms a metastatic tumor in the lung is metastatic breast cancer, not lung cancer.

Under a microscope, metastatic cancer cells generally look the same as cells of the original cancer. Moreover, metastatic cancer cells and cells of the original cancer usually have some molecular features in common, such as the presence of specific chromosome changes.

In some cases, treatment may help prolong the lives of people with metastatic cancer. In other cases, the primary goal of treatment for metastatic cancer is to control the growth of the cancer or to relieve symptoms it is causing. Metastatic tumors can cause severe damage to how the body functions, and most people who die of cancer die of metastatic disease.  
Not every change in the body’s tissues is cancer. Some tissue changes may develop into cancer if they are not treated, however. Here are some examples of tissue changes that are not cancer but, in some cases, are monitored because they could become cancer:

Hyperplasia occurs when cells within a tissue multiply faster than normal and extra cells build up. However, the cells and the way the tissue is organized still look normal under a microscope. Hyperplasia can be caused by several factors or conditions, including chronic irritation.
Dysplasia is a more advanced condition than hyperplasia. In dysplasia, there is also a buildup of extra cells. But the cells look abnormal and there are changes in how the tissue is organized. In general, the more abnormal the cells and tissue look, the greater the chance that cancer will form. Some types of dysplasia may need to be monitored or treated, but others do not. An example of dysplasia is an abnormal mole (called a dysplastic nevus) that forms on the skin. A dysplastic nevus can turn into melanoma, although most do not.
Carcinoma in situ is an even more advanced condition. Although it is sometimes called stage 0 cancer, it is not cancer because the abnormal cells do not invade nearby tissue the way that cancer cells do. But because some carcinomas in situ may become cancer, they are usually treated.
Carcinomas are the most common type of cancer. They are formed by epithelial cells, which are the cells that cover the inside and outside surfaces of the body. There are many types of epithelial cells, which often have a column-like shape when viewed under a microscope.

Carcinomas that begin in different epithelial cell types have specific names:

Adenocarcinoma is a cancer that forms in epithelial cells that produce fluids or mucus. Tissues with this type of epithelial cell are sometimes called glandular tissues. Most cancers of the breast, colon, and prostate are adenocarcinomas.

Basal cell carcinoma is a cancer that begins in the lower or basal (base) layer of the epidermis, which is a person’s outer layer of skin.

Squamous cell carcinoma is a cancer that forms in squamous cells, which are epithelial cells that lie just beneath the outer surface of the skin. Squamous cells also line many other organs, including the stomach, intestines, lungs, bladder, and kidneys. Squamous cells look flat, like fish scales, when viewed under a microscope. Squamous cell carcinomas are sometimes called epidermoid carcinomas.

Transitional cell carcinoma is a cancer that forms in a type of epithelial tissue called transitional epithelium, or urothelium. This tissue, which is made up of many layers of epithelial cells that can get bigger and smaller, is found in the linings of the bladder, ureters, and part of the kidneys (renal pelvis), and a few other organs. Some cancers of the bladder, ureters, and kidneys are transitional cell carcinomas.
Carcinomas are the most common type of cancer. They are formed by epithelial cells, which are the cells that cover the inside and outside surfaces of the body. There are many types of epithelial cells, which often have a column-like shape when viewed under a microscope.

Carcinomas that begin in different epithelial cell types have specific names:

Adenocarcinoma is a cancer that forms in epithelial cells that produce fluids or mucus. Tissues with this type of epithelial cell are sometimes called glandular tissues. Most cancers of the breast, colon, and prostate are adenocarcinomas.

Basal cell carcinoma is a cancer that begins in the lower or basal (base) layer of the epidermis, which is a person’s outer layer of skin.

Squamous cell carcinoma is a cancer that forms in squamous cells, which are epithelial cells that lie just beneath the outer surface of the skin. Squamous cells also line many other organs, including the stomach, intestines, lungs, bladder, and kidneys. Squamous cells look flat, like fish scales, when viewed under a microscope. Squamous cell carcinomas are sometimes called epidermoid carcinomas.

Transitional cell carcinoma is a cancer that forms in a type of epithelial tissue called transitional epithelium, or urothelium. This tissue, which is made up of many layers of epithelial cells that can get bigger and smaller, is found in the linings of the bladder, ureters, and part of the kidneys (renal pelvis), and a few other organs. Some cancers of the bladder, ureters, and kidneys are transitional cell carcinomas.
Cancers that begin in the blood-forming tissue of the bone marrow are called leukemias. These cancers do not form solid tumors. Instead, large numbers of abnormal white blood cells (leukemia cells and leukemic blast cells) build up in the blood and bone marrow, crowding out normal blood cells. The low level of normal blood cells can make it harder for the body to get oxygen to its tissues, control bleeding, or fight infections.  

There are four common types of leukemia, which are grouped based on how quickly the disease gets worse (acute or chronic) and on the type of blood cell the cancer starts in (lymphoblastic or myeloid). Acute forms of leukemia grow quickly and chronic forms grow more slowly.

Our page on leukemia has more information.
Lymphoma is cancer that begins in lymphocytes (T cells or B cells). These are disease-fighting white blood cells that are part of the immune system. In lymphoma, abnormal lymphocytes build up in lymph nodes and lymph vessels, as well as in other organs of the body.

There are two main types of lymphoma:

Hodgkin lymphoma – People with this disease have abnormal lymphocytes that are called Reed-Sternberg cells. These cells usually form from B cells.

Non-Hodgkin lymphoma – This is a large group of cancers that start in lymphocytes. The cancers can grow quickly or slowly and can form from B cells or T cells
Primary bone cancers include osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma. They account for less than 1% of diagnosed cancers each year and are associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Timely diagnosis is challenging because of late patient presentation, nonspecific symptoms that mimic common musculoskeletal injuries, and low suspicion by physicians. Plain radiography is the preferred diagnostic test. Radiographic suspicion of a bone malignancy should prompt quick referral to a cancer center for multidisciplinary care. Osteosarcoma, the most common bone cancer, most often occurs in children and adolescents. It typically develops in the metaphysis of long bones, specifically the distal femur, proximal tibia, and proximal humerus. Metastasis to the lungs is common. Use of neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy, in combination with surgery, has improved survival rates to nearly 80% for patients with localized disease, and 90% to 95% of patients do not require limb amputation. Ewing sarcoma is the second most common bone cancer and is similar to osteosarcoma in terms of presenting symptoms, age at occurrence, and treatment. Prognosis for osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma depends on the presence of metastasis, which lowers the five-year survival rate to 20% to 30%. Chondrosarcoma is the rarest bone cancer, primarily affecting adults older than 40 years. Survival rates are higher because most of these tumors are low-grade lesions.Three types of cancers arise in bone itself: osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma. Although these malignancies account for less than 1% of all diagnosed cancers each year, their morbidity and mortality are significant.1 This article reviews the characteristics of primary bone cancers, their diagnosis, treatment, and prognoses.Osteosarcoma is the most common bone cancer, accounting for nearly two-thirds of all cases.2–4 Approximately 1,200 patients are diagnosed with osteosarcoma in the United States annually.1 Osteosarcoma is primarily an illness of childhood, with a small increase in incidence among persons older than 60 years. It is the third most common childhood malignancy, with a median incidence at 12 years of age for girls and 16 years for boys.2

Osteosarcoma is thought to originate from malignant primitive mesenchymal cells that differentiate into osteoblasts, which in turn produce a malignant osteoid matrix. Osteosarcomas can arise in any bone, but classically develop in the metaphyses of long bones. Nearly 60% occur in the distal femur, the proximal tibia, and the proximal humerus.3 A bone’s metaphysis contains the growth plate, which is responsible for active bone formation and elongation. Thus, osteosarcomas tend to occur at the age and location at which bony growth is the most active and when cells are vulnerable for mutationsEwing sarcoma is the second most common type of bone cancer, comprising about one-third of cases in the United States.2–4 Its estimated incidence is one in 100,000 among persons 10 to 19 years of age. It is more common in whites and Asians than in blacks.4

The cell origin of Ewing sarcoma is not known. It has been hypothesized that these tumors derive from undifferentiated, primitive neuroectodermal or neural crest cells. Recently, it has been suggested that Ewing sarcoma originates from primitive stem cells, and the degree of malignancy depends on the stage of stem cell arrest during differentiation.6 Ewing sarcoma is included in a group of tumors known as small blue round cell tumors, based on their microscopic features.

Ewing sarcoma and osteosarcoma have similar characteristics. Ewing sarcoma primarily affects children and adolescents, with a median age of 15 years.2 Ewing tumors also classically metastasize to the lungs and other bones. A major difference is the anatomic locations in which Ewing sarcomas typically develop: the pelvis (Figure 2), diaphysis of long bones, ribs, and scapula.Chondrosarcoma is a malignant, cartilage-producing bone tumor. It is the least common bone cancer, with an estimated incidence of one in 200,000 persons.7 Unlike osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma, chondrosarcoma typically manifests in adults 40 to 75 years of age. It occurs more in the central skeleton, commonly arising from the pelvic girdle, vertebrae, and proximal long bones
Clinical conditions that result in bone turnover increase the risk of bone cancer. Examples include metal implants within the bone from orthopedic interventions and Paget disease.9 Patients with a history of radiation therapy have a higher risk of osteosarcoma in previously irradiated bone. There are few known risk factors for Ewing sarcoma and chondrosarcoma, and they are not associated with familial cancer syndromes or radiation.

PRESENTING SYMPTOMS
Regional or localized pain with associated overlying tenderness and decreased range of motion are the most common presenting symptoms of bone cancer.10,11 These symptoms may mimic common musculoskeletal injuries, and pain often begins after minor physical trauma.

Soft tissue swelling and unexplained fevers are other common symptoms of bone cancer. Fever can relapse in patients with Ewing sarcoma, with intervals of weeks or months without symptoms. Nighttime pain and pathologic fracture can be concerning manifestations of bony malignancies; however, these symptoms are not common. Although bone cancer should be part of the differential diagnosis for patients with nighttime awakenings with bony pain, pain during the night is present in only 21% to 37% of patients with osteosarcoma and 19% of patients with Ewing sarcoma.11,12 Pathologic fracture is noted in 7% to 8% of patients with osteosarcoma Plain radiography is the preferred imaging modality for diagnosing malignant bone tumors.2,3,13 Patients commonly associate initial symptoms with minor trauma, and primary care physicians often order radiography of the affected limb with a clinical suspicion for fracture rather than bone malignancy. Table 3 lists common radiographic findings in patients with bone cancer.3,13 When radiographic findings raise suspicion for bone malignancy, laboratory studies (urinalysis, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, liver function testing, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine level) should be obtained to evaluate other systems.
Because of the aggressive nature of bone cancers, early diagnosis is critical. However, delays in diagnosis are common.11 In the absence of trauma or known injury, a patient’s perception of symptoms may not elicit initial concern. Bone cancers can also present with relapsing and remitting symptoms, including pain and fever. Symptom-free periods may mislead physicians and patients into thinking the condition has resolved. Initial pain and swelling in bone cancers can mimic symptoms of minor musculoskeletal injuries.

In cases of persistent or recurrent bony pain or soft tissue swelling without known trauma, physicians should be encouraged to perform radiography. In one study, the presence of a palpable mass and the physician’s decision to order radiography were associated with a shorter diagnostic delay
Although treatment of bone cancers varies in the type of modalities used, the main factor in maximizing survival and quality of life is expedient referral to a cancer center at the time a bone malignancy is suspected.14,15 Because bone cancers most often occur in children and adolescents, children’s cancer hospitals typically have more experienced treatment teams. A multidisciplinary team includes a primary care physician, an orthopedic surgical oncologist, a pathologist experienced in bone tumors, pediatric oncologists, rehabilitation specialists, pediatric nurse specialists, and social workers.

BIOPSY
A properly performed biopsy starts the process of confirming the diagnosis of bone cancer, establishes tumor grade, and directs treatment. An experienced surgeon should perform the procedure.14 Whether the biopsy is obtained via open surgical technique or by percutaneous needle, biopsy tracts and skin can become contaminated with malignant cells. Thus, biopsy sites require complete subsequent removal (en bloc) and should be planned carefully to maximize the opportunity for limb salvage. Improperly performed biopsies can lead to misdiagnosis, local recurrence, amputation, and decreased surviva
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimens aim to cause tumor necrosis and decrease primary tumor size, as well as the number and size of pulmonary metastases.17–19 It has increased the feasibility of limb-salvage surgery by reducing the amount of tissue needed to achieve wide margins. Adjuvant chemotherapy has been successful in decreasing postsurgical metastasis. Chemotherapy drugs with proven effectiveness against osteosarcoma include high-dose methotrexate, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and cisplatin
Surgical excision is the definitive treatment for osteosarcoma. The goal of resection is to remove primary tumors with clear margins to limit recurrence and metastasis. Currently, 90% to 95% of patients with extremity osteosarcoma avoid amputation with successful limb-sparing resections.5 The success of limb-salvage surgery is largely due to improved preoperative planning with magnetic resonance imaging, advances in soft tissue and vascular surgery techniques, and enhanced fabrication and expansion of endoprostheses.19 Limb amputations are still necessary for some large tumors, cases in which vital vascular structures are compromised, and for poor response or tumor progression during chemotherapy
Osteosarcoma most often metastasizes to the pulmonary system through blood; 20% of patients initially present with evidence of lung metastases on computed tomography.16 As with primary lesions, treatment of metastases relies on chemotherapy. However, induction chemotherapy often does not resolve metastases entirely. Surgical resection of metastatic lung lesions is recommended, unless the location or amount of involved tissue makes surgery clinically unfeasible
Prognosis varies greatly among the three types of bone cancers and is influenced by many variables (Table 5).2,3,7,21,23 The most significant prognostic indicator for osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma is the presence of metastases at the time of diagnosis. Patients with metastatic osteosarcoma or Ewing sarcoma have a survival rate of only 20% to 30%, compared with 70% to 80% for localized disease.16,21,23 Response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy is another significant prognostic marker for osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma. Patients with osteosarcoma who have necrosis of more than 90% of the primary tumor on histologic review of surgical tissue have an increased 10-year survival rate compared with patients with less response.17,21 The major prognostic factor for patients with chondrosarcoma is the grade of the tumor. Approximately 85% of these tumors are low grade, and overall survival is favorable
This study describes the first known model of bone cancer pain in the rat. Sprague–Dawley rats receiving intra-tibial injections of syngeneic MRMT-1 rat mammary gland carcinoma cells developed behavioural signs indicative of pain, including: mechanical allodynia, difference of weight bearing between hind paws and mechanical hyperalgesia. The development of the bone tumour and structural damage to the bone was monitored by radiological analysis, quantitative measurement of mineral content and histology.

Intra-tibial injections of 3×103 or 3×104 syngeneic MRMT-1 cells produced a rapidly expanding tumour within the boundaries of the tibia, causing severe remodelling of the bone. Radiographs showed extensive damage to the cortical bone and the trabeculae by day 10–14 after inoculation of 3×103 MRMT-1 cells, and by day 20, the damage was threatening the integrity of the tibial bone. While both mineral content and mineral density decreased significantly in the cancerous bone, osteoclast numbers in the peritumoural compact bone remained unchanged. However, tartarate-resistant acid phosphatase staining revealed a large number of polykariotic cells, resembling those of osteoclasts within the tumour. No tumour growth was observed after the injection of heat-killed MRMT-1 cells.

Intra-tibial injections of 3×103 or 3×104 MRMT-1 cells, heat-killed cells or vehicle did not show changes in body weight and core temperature over 19–20 days. The general activity of animals after injection with live or heat-killed MRMT-1 cells was higher than that of the control group, however, the activity of the MRMT-1 treated group declined during the progress of the disease.

Rats receiving intra-tibial injections of MRMT-1 cells displayed the gradual development of mechanical allodynia and mechanical hyperalgesia/reduced weight bearing on the affected limb, beginning on day 12–14 or 10–12 following injection of 3×103 or 3×104 cells, respectively. These symptoms were not observed in rats receiving heat-killed cells or vehicle.

Behavioural data suggest a reasonable time window for evaluation of anti-nociceptive agents between day 14 and 20 after cancer cell inoculation in this model.

Acute treatment with morphine (1–3 mg/kg, subcutanously (s.c.)) produced a dose-dependent reduction in the response frequency of hind paw withdrawal to von Frey filament stimulation 17 or 19 days following intra-tibial injections of 3×103 MRMT-1 cells. A significant reduction in the difference in hind limb weight bearing was also observed. Acute treatment with celebrex (10–30 mg/kg, s.c.) did not affect mechanical allodynia or difference in weight bearing in rats 20 days following treatment with 3×103 MRMT-1 cells.

Although the pathophysiology of cancer pain is largely unknown, significant enhancement of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) staining in the corresponding segments of the ipsilateral spinal cord highlights the possible involvement of astrocytes.

In summary, the induction of bone cancer in the rat by the syngeneic MRMT-1 mammary tumour cell line provides a valid pre-clinical model for pain associated with bone metastases. Significant mechanical hyperalgesia and allodynia develops in association with the progression of the tumour in the bone marrow cavity, while the general condition of the animal remains satisfactory. While acute treatment with morphine has some analgesic effect on hind limb sparing the selective COX-2 inhibitor, celebrex, has no influence on the pain-related behavioural changes in this model.
Patients with sensory disturbances of painful and non-painful character show distinct changes in touch and/or pain sensitivity. The patterns of sensory changes were compared to those of human surrogate models of neuropathic pain to assess the underlying mechanisms. We investigated 30 consecutive in-patients with dysaesthesia of various origins (peripheral, spinal, and brainstem lesions) and 15 healthy subjects. Tactile thresholds were determined with calibrated von Frey hairs (1.1 mm ∅). Thresholds and stimulus–response functions for pricking pain were determined with a series of calibrated punctate mechanical stimulators (0.2 mm ∅). Allodynia was tested by light stroking with a brush, Q-tip, and cotton wisp. Perceptual wind-up was tested by trains of punctate stimuli at 0.2 or 1 Hz. Intradermal injection of capsaicin (n=7) and A-fiber conduction blockade (n=8) served as human surrogate models for neurogenic hyperalgesia and partial nociceptive deafferentation, respectively. Patients without pain (18/30) showed a continuous distribution of threshold shifts in the dysaesthetic skin area with a low to moderate increase in pain threshold (by 1.52±0.45 log2 units). Patients with painful dysaesthesia presented as two separate groups (six patients each): one showing lowered pain thresholds (by −1.94±0.46 log2 units, hyperalgesia) and the other elevated pain thresholds (by 3.02±0.48 log2 units, hypoalgesia). The human surrogate model of neurogenic hyperalgesia revealed nearly identical leftward shifts in stimulus–response function for pricking pain as patients with spontaneous pain and hyperalgesia (by a factor of about 5 each). The sensory changes in the human surrogate model of deafferentation were similar to patients with hypoalgesia and spontaneous pain (rightward shift of the stimulus–response function with a decrease in slope). Perceptual wind-up did not differ between symptomatic and control areas. There was no exclusive association of any parameter obtained by quantitative sensory testing with a particular disease (of either peripheral or central origin). Our findings suggest that neuropathic pain is based on two distinct mechanisms: (I) central sensitization (neurogenic hyperalgesia; in patients with minor sensory impairment) and (II) partial nociceptive deafferentation (painful hypoalgesia; in patients with major sensory deficit). This distinction as previously postulated for postherpetic neuralgia, is obviously valid also for other conditions. Our findings emphasize the significance of a mechanism-based classification of neuropathic pain.
The goal of the present study was to identify nuclei of the amygdala in which opioid-sensitive systems can act to recruit nociceptive modulatory circuitry in the rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM) and affect nociceptive responsiveness. In lightly anesthetized rats, 10 μg of morphine was bilaterally microinjected into basolateral, cortical, medial, central, and lateral nuclei of the amygdala to determine the relative influence on the activity of identified ON, OFF and NEUTRAL cells in the RVM and on the latency of the tail flick reflex evoked by noxious radiant heat. Infusions of morphine into the basolateral nuclei resulted in a substantial, naloxone-reversible increase in tail flick latency, and significantly increased ongoing firing of OFF cells and depressed that of ON cells. The reflex-related changes in cell firing were also attenuated. Morphine infusions into the cortical nuclei resulted in a small (approximately 1 s) but significant increase in tail flick latency. As with basolateral microinjections, ongoing activity of the OFF cells was increased, and although the ongoing firing of ON cells was not significantly changed, the reflex-related burst that characterizes these neurons was reduced. Microinjections in the medial nuclei again altered ongoing activity of both ON cells and OFF cells. However, the duration of the OFF cell pause and tail flick latency were unchanged. NEUTRAL cells were not affected by morphine at any site. Morphine applied within the central, medial lateral and dorsal lateral nuclei had no effect on RVM neurons or on the tail flick. Thus, focal application of morphine within the basolateral nucleus of the amygdala produced hypoalgesia and influenced RVM ON and OFF cells in a manner similar to that seen following systemic or RVM opioid administration. Opioid action within the medial and cortical nuclei also influenced RVM cell activity, but did not prevent the reflex-related OFF cell pause, and failed to alter the tail flick substantially. These observations, plus the lack of an opioid-activated influence from the central and lateral nuclei, demonstrate fundamental differences among systems linking the different amygdalar nuclei with the RVM. One way in which the modulatory circuitry of the RVM might be engaged physiologically in behaving animals is via opioid-mediated activation of the basolateral nucleus.Vulvar vestibulitis syndrome (VVS) is a common cause of dyspareunia in pre-menopausal women. Little is known about sensory function in the vulvar vestibule, despite Kinsey's assertion that it is important for sexual sensation. We examined punctate tactile and pain thresholds to modified von Frey filaments in the genital region of women with VVS and age- and contraceptive-matched pain-free controls. Women with VVS had lower tactile and pain thresholds around the vulvar vestibule and on the labium minus than controls, and these results were reliable over time. Women with VVS also had lower tactile, punctate pain, and pressure-pain tolerance over the deltoid muscle on the upper arm, suggesting that generalized systemic hypersensitivity may contribute to VVS in some women. In testing tactile thresholds, 20% of trials were blank, and there was no group difference in the false positive rate, indicating that response bias cannot account for the lower thresholds. Women with VVS reported significantly more catastrophizing thoughts related to intercourse pain, but there was no difference between groups in catastrophizing for unrelated pains. Pain intensity ratings for stimuli above the pain threshold increased in a parallel fashion with log stimulus intensity in both groups, but the ratings of distress were substantially greater in the VVS group than in controls at equivalent levels of pain intensity. The data imply that VVS may reflect a specific pathological process in the vestibular region, superimposed on systemic hypersensitivity to tactile and pain stimuli.
Somatosensory perception thresholds, perceived intensity, and quality of perceptions were assessed in 20 women with fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS) and in 20 healthy age-matched female controls. All patients and controls scaled perceived intensity and described perceived quality of randomized thermal (Thermotest) and tactile (von Frey filaments) stimulation. Perceived intensity was scaled by free-number magnitude estimation and interindividual comparability was accomplished by Master Scaling. Perceived quality was assessed by choosing verbal descriptors from a list. Thenar was used as a reference for each modality tested. All patients were able to reliably scale perceived intensity at thenar, as well as in pain-affected body areas. Perception thresholds for cold pain, heat pain, cold-pain tolerance and heat-pain tolerance were significantly lower in patients than controls. For cold and tactile stimulation, the master scaled perceived intensities were significantly higher in patients’ pain-affected areas, whereas for warmth/heat stimulation, the intensities were significantly lower. In the qualitative perceptual analysis the most striking and significant finding was the aberration of cold-evoked perceptions in all patients: most stimuli in the range of 30–10°C were reported as heat or other paresthetic or dysesthetic perceptions. The perceptual quality of warmth, and of touch, did not differ from the controls. Another aberration was observed in the nociceptive range of thermal and of tactile stimulation as significantly more frequent pain-related descriptors than in controls. This indicates a general nociceptive facilitation in addition to the lower thermal pain thresholds. The combination of cold hyperesthesia, cold dysesthesia, and multimodal hyperalgesia suggests a selective pathophysiology at a particular level of integration, possibly in the insular cortex. It is suggested that the aberrations revealed by the supraliminal sensory evaluation may be generic for FMS. Particularly, the aberrations established in all patients for perceived quality and intensity in the cold sensory channel may be an additional diagnostic criterion.
There is some evidence for the efficacy of acupuncture in chronic low-back pain (LBP), but it remains unclear whether acupuncture is superior to placebo. In a randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled trial, we evaluated the effect of traditional acupuncture in chronic LBP. A total of 131 consecutive out-patients of the Department of Orthopaedics, University Goettingen, Germany, (age=48.1 years, 58.5% female, duration of pain: 9.6 years) with non-radiating LBP for at least 6 months and a normal neurological examination were randomized to one of three groups over 12 weeks. Each group received active physiotherapy over 12 weeks. The control group (n=46) received no further treatment, the acupuncture group (n=40) received 20 sessions of traditional acupuncture and the sham-acupuncture group (n=45) 20 sessions of minimal acupuncture.

Changes from baseline to the end of treatment and to 9-month follow-up were assessed in pain intensity and in pain disability, and secondary in psychological distress and in spine flexion, compared by intervention groups.

Acupuncture was superior to the control condition (physiotherapy) regarding pain intensity (P=0.000), pain disability (P=0.000), and psychological distress (P=0.020) at the end of treatment. Compared to sham-acupuncture, acupuncture reduced psychological distress (P=0.040) only. At 9-month follow-up, the superiority of acupuncture compared to the control condition became less and acupuncture was not different to sham-acupuncture.

We found a significant improvement by traditional acupuncture in chronic LBP compared to routine care (physiotherapy) but not compared to sham-acupuncture. The trial demonstrated a placebo effect of traditional acupuncture in chronic LBP.
Research has demonstrated that women report more pain than men, and clinical observations suggest that attenuated adrenocortical activity is associated with high pain sensitivity. The extent to which cortisol concentrations and hemodynamics contribute to gender differences in pain sensitivity has not been investigated. Thirty-four women and 31 men performed the hand cold pressor test (CPT). Participants rated their pain every 15 s during a 90-s CPT and a 90-s post-CPT recovery period and reported pain using the McGill Pain Questionnaire (MPQ). Salivary cortisol samples and cardiovascular measures were collected prior to, during, and after the CPT. Women reported greater pain than men during and after the CPT and on the MPQ (Ps<0.01). CPT disrupted the expected diurnal decline in cortisol, as shown by a significant increase in cortisol concentration post-CPT (P<0.01) in men and women. Regression analyses revealed that pre-CPT cortisol concentrations predicted lower pain reports during and after CPT in men only (P<0.01). Systolic blood pressure (BP) and stroke volume correlated negatively with pain reports only in women (Ps<0.05). Controlling for potential confounding variables did not alter these relationships. The negative association between pre-CPT cortisol and pain perception in men and the association between BP and pain in women demonstrate different physiological predictors of pain perception in men and women.
To review how common cancers such as breast, lung, and prostate cancers drive significant and frequently life altering pain when the cells metastasize to bones.

Recent Findings
Similar to cancer, the factors that drive bone cancer pain evolve and change with disease progression. Bone cancer pain has both a nociceptive and neuropathic component. The nociceptive component is driven by the release of algogenic substances by tumor and their associated stromal cells, acidosis caused by bone-destroying osteoclasts, and mechanical destabilization and fracture of the bone. The neuropathic component is induced by tumor cell growth which injures and destroys the distal ends of nerve fibers that normally innervate the bone as well as by inducing a highly pathological sprouting of both sensory and sympathetic nerve fibers.

There is both a nociceptive and neuropathic component of bone cancer pain. In bone cancer pain there is frequently a continual afferent drive of sensory nerve fibers that induces a peripheral and central sensitization. These mechanistic insights have begun to lead to advances in not only how we understand bone cancer pain but to the development of new therapies to treat bone cancer pain.Many common cancers including breast, prostate, kidney, and lung, the tumors have a strong predilection to metastasize to bones such as the vertebrae, ribs, hip, femur, and tibia [1] (Fig.1). Tumor metastasis to bone frequently results in pain, hypercalcemia, anemia, increased susceptibility to infection, skeletal fractures, compression of the spinal cord, spinal instability, and decreased mobility. Bone cancer pain is usually first described as dull in character and constant in presentation, and this pain gradually intensifies with time [2]. As bone remodeling progresses, severe spontaneous pain frequently occurs [3] and the occurrence and severity of this pain can be both acute and unpredictable. This component of bone cancer pain can be particularly debilitating to the patient's functional status and quality of life [1, 3-5]. Breakthrough pain, which is an intermittent episode of extreme pain which “breakthroughs” the opiate regiment the patient is on, can occur spontaneously or more commonly is induced by movement of the affected limb or bearing of weight on the tumor-bearing bone
Primary afferent sensory neurons are the gateway through which sensory information from peripheral tissues is transmitted to the spinal cord and brain and these sensory nerve fibers innervate every organ of the body with exception of the brain. The cell bodies of sensory fibers that innervate the head and body are housed in the trigeminal and dorsal root ganglia respectively, and can be divided into two major categories, large diameter myelinated A fibers and small diameter unmyelinated C-fibers
The mechanisms that drive bone cancer pain evolve with disease progression. Cancer cells and their associated stromal cells can generate ongoing and breakthrough pain that has nociceptive and neuropathic components. The tumor and associated stromal cells release factors that sensitize and activate bone nociceptors, injure the sensory nerve fibers, and release growth factors that drive ectopic sprouting of nerve fibers and neuroma formation, all of which can contribute to peripheral and central sensitization. These studies have led to the approval of 3 new classes of therapies (bisphosphonates, RANKL inhibitors and alpha 2, delta 1 inhibitors, such as gabapentin, which blocks the neuropathic component of cancer pain as described above.
Bone cancer pain is a devastating manifestation of metastatic cancer. Unfortunately, current therapies can be ineffective, and when they are effective, the duration of the patient's survival typically exceeds the duration of pain relief. New, mechanistically based therapies are desperately needed. Study of experimental animal models has provided insight into the mechanisms that drive bone cancer pain and provides an opportunity for developing targeted therapies. Mechanisms that drive bone cancer pain include tumor-directed osteoclast-mediated osteolysis, tumor cells themselves, tumor-induced nerve injury, stimulation of transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 ion channel, endothelin A, and host cell production of nerve growth factor. Current and future therapies include external beam radiation, osteoclast-targeted inhibiting agents, anti-inflammatory drugs, transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 antagonists, and antibody therapies that target nerve growth factor or tumor angiogenesis. It is likely that a combination of these therapies will be superior to any one therapy alone.
Experimental models of bone cancer pain have been developed in mice and rats. These models study tumors at different anatomic sites and of varied histologic origin. Contemporary experimental models are based on direct injection of cancer cells into the medulla of the femur, humerus, and calcaneus
Direct local intramedullary injection of tumor cells is preferred over systemic administration of tumor cells via i.v. or intracardiac routes because the skeletal site where the tumor develops is known, allowing for analysis of corresponding behavioral and neuroanatomic segments. In addition, intramedullary injection permits simultaneous and precise quantitative evaluation of site-specific pain behaviors, tumor growth, bone destruction, bone microenvironment, and neurochemistry. Bone cancer pain has been studied using a rat breast carcinoma model (MRMT-1), murine fibrosarcomas (2472), murine breast carcinomas (4T1), hepatocellular carcinomas (HCa-1), and murine melanoma (B16).

Assessment of cancer-induced bone pain in experimental animal models has been done based on behavioral analysis and neurochemical markers of pain, radiographic imaging, and histology. Ongoing pain is measured in animal models by quantification of spontaneous guarding and flinching or the duration and frequency that a mouse holds the tumor-affected limb aloft during a predetermined observation period. Movement-evoked bone pain is assessed by limb use in an open field and forced ambulation.

Radiographic and histologic analysis of osteolytic tumors have consistently shown that mature, multinucleated osteoclasts are stimulated by release from tumor cytokines and growth factors. Osteolytic bone destruction has been correlated to pain behaviors, neurochemical changes, and cellular changes in the spinal cord 
Cancer-induced bone pain is a complex pain condition. Novel initiatives pursuing the etiology and treatment of bone cancer pain are requisite to identify the mechanistic origins of this debilitating pain condition. Recent work using experimental animal models that mimic patient-like states have proven valuable by initiating study of bone cancer pain. From this research, induction of peripheral and central sensitization of the nervous system has been shown to originate from skeletal cancers. Continued investigations to elucidate molecular markers and mechanisms through which sensitization occurs will be important. Use of current and emerging animal models to test the efficacy of emerging therapies will direct future clinical management of this dreaded condition.
Common cancers, including cancers of the breast, lung, and prostate, frequently metastasize to multiple bones where they can cause significant and life-altering pain. Similar to cancer itself, the factors that drive bone cancer pain evolve and change with disease progression. Once cancer cells have metastasized to bone, both the cancer cells and their associated stromal cells generate pain by releasing algogenic substances including protons, bradykinin, endothelins, prostaglandins, proteases, and tyrosine kinase activators. The release of these factors by cancer/stromal cells can induce sensitization and activation of nerve fibers that innervate the bone. Additionally, these factors can drive a remarkable increase in the number, size, and activity of bone-destroying osteoclasts, which can ultimately result in fracture of the tumor-bearing bone. Tumor growth in bone can also generate a neuropathic pain by directly injuring nerve fibers as well as inducing an active and highly pathological sprouting of both sensory and sympathetic nerve fibers that normally innervate the bone. This structural reorganization of sensory and sympathetic nerve fibers in the bone, combined with the cellular and neurochemical reorganization that occurs in the spinal cord and brain, appears to contribute to the peripheral and central sensitization that is common in advanced bone cancer pain. These mechanistic insights have begun to lead to advances in both how we understand and treat bone cancer pain.
Recent advances in brain science have shown that the brain function encoding emotion depends on interoceptive signals such as visceral pain. Visceral pain arose early in our evolutionary history. Bottom–up processing from gut-to-brain and top–down autonomic/neuroendocrine mechanisms in brain-to-gut signaling constitute a circuit. Brain imaging techniques have enabled us to depict the visceral pain pathway as well as the related emotional circuit. Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is characterized by chronic recurrent abdominal pain or abdominal discomfort associated with bowel dysfunction. It is also thought to be a disorder of the brain–gut link associated with an exaggerated response to stress. Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), a major mediator of the stress response in the brain–gut axis, is an obvious candidate in the pathophysiology of IBS. Indeed, administration of CRH has been shown to aggravate the visceral sensorimotor response in IBS patients, and the administration of peptidergic CRH antagonists seems to alleviate IBS pathophysiology. Serotonin (5-HT) is another likely candidate associated with brain–gut function in IBS, as 5-HT3 antagonists, 5-HT4 agonists, and antidepressants were demonstrated to regulate 5-HT neurotransmission in IBS patients. Autonomic nervous system function, the neuroimmune axis, and the brain–gut–microbiota axis show specific profiles in IBS patients. Further studies on stress and visceral pain neuropathways in IBS patients are warranted.
In the United States, cancer is the second most common cause of death and it is expected that about 562,340 Americans will have died of cancer in 2009. Bone cancer pain is common in patients with advanced breast, prostate, and lung cancer as these tumors have a remarkable affinity to metastasize to bone. Once tumors metastasize to bone, they are a major cause of morbidity and mortality as the tumor induces significant skeletal remodeling, fractures, pain, and anemia. Currently, the factors that drive cancer pain are poorly understood. However, several recently introduced models of bone cancer pain, which closely mirror the human condition, are providing insight into the mechanisms that drive bone cancer pain and guide the development of mechanism-based therapies to treat the cancer pain. Several of these mechanism-based therapies have now entered human clinical trials. If successful, these therapies have the potential to significantly enlarge the repertoire of modalities that can be used to treat bone cancer pain and improve the quality of life, functional status, and survival of patients with bone cancer.
The majority of patients with metastatic bone disease experience moderate to severe pain and bone pain is one of the most common types of chronic pain in these patients.1 Although bone is not a vital organ, many common tumors (breast, prostate, thyroid, kidney, and lung) have a strong predilection to simultaneously metastasize to multiple bones.1, 2 It has been reported that tumor mestastases to the skeleton affect over 400,000 individuals in the United States annually. Tumor growth in bone results in pain, hypercalcemia, anemia, increased susceptibility to infection, skeletal fractures, compression of the spinal cord, spinal instability, and decreased mobility, all of which compromise the patient's functional status, quality of life, and survival.1, 3 Once tumor cells have metastasized to the skeleton, tumor-induced bone pain is usually described as dull in character, constant in presentation, and gradually increasing in intensity with time.3 Adherence to the World Health Organization analgesic ladder, along with adjuvant therapies such as bisphosphonates, corticosteroids, radiotherapy, and radionucleotides, can frequently control ongoing bone cancer pain. However, both opiates and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may have significant dose-limiting side effects.

As tumor growth and tumor-induced bone remodeling progress, severe “incident pain” frequently occurs.3 Incident pain is also known as “breakthrough pain” as the pain breaks through the analgesic regime that is controlling the ongoing pain. This pain is defined as an intermittent episode of extreme pain which occurs spontaneously, during non-noxious movement,4 or mechanical loading of the tumor-bearing bone(s). A major problem with incident pain in bone cancer is that it is usually more severe than ongoing pain, it appears suddenly (within seconds to minutes) and it can occur multiple times each day.4 Given the therapies that are currently available, as well as the rapid onset and severity of incident pain, this pain remains one of the most challenging of cancer pains to fully control.4 When present, incident pain can be highly debilitating to the patient's functional status and quality of life.2-4

Preclinical models of bone cancer pain
Previously, there were two commonly used in vivo mouse models to study tumor-induced bone destruction. In the first model, tumor cells are injected into the left ventricle of the heart and then spread to multiple sites including the bone marrow where they grow and induce remodeling of the surrounding bone.5, 6 While this model replicates the observation that most tumor cells metastasize to multiple sites including bone, a major problem with this model is the animal-to-animal variability in the sites, size, and extent of the metastasis. Because the tumors frequently metastasize to vital organs such as the lung or liver, the general health of the animal is also variable, making behavioral assessment of bone pain difficult. Given these problems, intracardiac injection of cancer cells as a model for bone cancer pain has proven difficult.
Animal and clinical studies of bone cancer have reported that the antiresorptive effects of bisphosphonate therapies simultaneously reduce bone cancer pain, tumor-induced bone destruction, and tumor growth within the bone.12, 13, 21 Bisphosphonates are a class of antiresorptive compounds that are pyrophosphate analogues which display high affinity for calcium ions, causing them to rapidly and avidly bind to the mineralized matrix of bone.15 As osteoclasts resorb bone they use endocytosis and transcytosis to clear the bone breakdown products from the osteoclast–bone interface (including the bisphosphonate, which is bound to the mineralized bone). Bisphosphonates, once taken up by the osteoclasts, induce loss of function and ultimately apoptosis of the osteoclasts.15

It should be stressed that while bisphosphonates are approved and are frequently used to reduce tumor-induced bone destruction and bone cancer pain, bisphosphonates do have unwanted side effects (including induction of arthralgias and osteonecrosis of the jaw),15 and it has yet to be definitively shown that bisphosphonates increase the survival of patients with bone cancer. For this reason, other therapies targeting osteoclasts are already in mid- to late-stage clinical trials and hold significant promise for alleviating bone cancer pain and tumor-induced bone remodeling. One line of therapies attempts to block the binding of receptor activator for nuclear factor κB ligand (RANKL), which is an essential regulator of osteoclasts.11 Studies in mice have shown that sequestration of RANKL with OPG attenuates sarcoma-induced bone pain, bone remodeling, and tumor growth within the bone (Figs. 4B–E).7 Recent small clinical studies have shown that in humans with multiple myeloma or breast cancer metastasis to bone, Denosumab (a fully humanized monoclonal antibody that inhibits RANKL) markedly reduces tumor-induced bone resorption and skeletal-related events (which include fracture and pain).22 Currently, phase III clinical trials are underway for assessing Denosumab's effects on attenuating cancer-induced bone loss in breast and prostate cancers,23 skeletal related events (pain, fracture) due to the spread of cancer to the bone in multiple myeloma and multiple solid tumors, as well as the potential to delay bone metastases in prostate cancer
Bone cancer pain is very common, and patients with this type of pain may be difficult to treat. Development of an experimental model for studying this condition is critical to advancing an understanding of the mechanisms that cause pain in patients with malignant disease
A murine model of bone cancer was studied. Combined analysis of the extent of tumor-induced bone destruction, pain, and neurochemical characterization of the peripheral and central nervous systems was performed to investigate bone cancer pain. Disease-induced bone destruction was assessed by radiographs and histomorphometry. Pain was assessed by spontaneous and elicited behaviors, and neurochemical analysis involved immunohistochemical detection of hyperalgesic peptides and neurochemical markers.Mice with distal femoral sarcomas exhibited behavioral and neurochemical measures of pain. The pain condition created by malignant bone disease was distinct neurochemically from inflammatory and neuropathic pain states. Experimental evidence indicated that both disease-induced osteolysis and tumors themselves contributed to the generation of pain and that peripheral and central sensitization of the nervous system was present.Malignant bone disease creates a unique pain state that involves sensitization of the nervous system. Major contributors to the pain state within the bone tissue are osteoclastic bone resorption and the malignant disease itself
The disease-related event that has the most significant impact on quality of life for patients with malignant disease is cancer-induced pain. Bone cancer pain is the most common source of pain in patients with malignant disease.1-4 It affects patients with bone sarcomas and patients with malignant tumors that have spread to bone. Breast carcinoma and prostate carcinoma are the most common cause of pain from malignant bone disease.5 This fact underscores the prevalence of these two types of carcinoma and their affinity for metastasizing to bone. In fact, 70% of patients with advanced breast or prostate carcinoma have skeletal metastases, and skeletal metastases are present in > 90% of patients who die from breast or prostate carcinoma.5 At its onset, bone cancer pain can be intermittent, but it progresses rapidly into continuous pain that is exacerbated by episodes of breakthrough pain. Once this chronic pain is established, the circumstance further deteriorates when mechanical allodynia develops. Mechanical allodynia occurs when normally nonpainful activity or stimulation is perceived as painful. For example, coughing, turning in bed, or gentle limb movements can cause intense pain
Despite the availability of a variety of therapies for treating bone cancer pain, permanent pain relief often is not achieved.3, 4 Current treatments focus on eradicating bone tumors, decreasing the impact of tumor-induced bone loss, surgical stabilization of painful bones, or administration of strong pain medications. Treatments that focus on eradicating tumors are chemotherapy and radiation. Of these two treatments, external beam radiation is most effective at relieving pain, with 90% of patients receiving some pain relief and 50% of patients experiencing a period of complete pain relief. Unfortunately, > 50% of patients who receive some pain relief will have their pain return to pretreatment levels.6 The mechanism through which radiation decreases bone cancer pain is unknown, but it is suspected that the mechanism is related to decreased tumor burden.

Treatments that focus on decreasing potentially painful cancer-induced bone loss include administration of bisphosphonates and/or surgical stabilization of affected bones. After treatment with bisphosphonates, up to 50% of patients report some relief of bone pain.7, 8 The mechanism through which bisphosphonates decrease bone cancer pain is unknown, but it is suspected that the mechanism is related to the inhibition of disease-induced, osteoclast-mediated bone loss.9-12 Interpretation of pain-relief data from clinical trials using bisphosphonates should be performed with caution, however, because most of these patients are receiving concurrent antineoplastic therapy as well as radiation therapy
Surgical stabilization of bones with painful skeletal metastasis can be employed to manage pain that has not responded to other treatment modalities or, in extreme cases, to prevent skeletal fracture.15 Although it is suspected that such treatments relieve pain, this has been reported only in retrospective clinical studies with uncertain inclusion criteria and follow-up. A recent pilot study that reported the first prospective, consecutive series of surgical treatment of painful skeletal metastases demonstrated that surgical treatment did not provide a clear benefit to quality of life for patients with advanced skeletal metastases
Surgical stabilization of bones with painful skeletal metastasis can be employed to manage pain that has not responded to other treatment modalities or, in extreme cases, to prevent skeletal fracture.15 Although it is suspected that such treatments relieve pain, this has been reported only in retrospective clinical studies with uncertain inclusion criteria and follow-up. A recent pilot study that reported the first prospective, consecutive series of surgical treatment of painful skeletal metastases demonstrated that surgical treatment did not provide a clear benefit to quality of life for patients with advanced skeletal metastases
The final means for managing bone cancer pain is through medication. Patients with malignant disease who have bone pain despite chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and/or bisphosphonate therapy receive various combinations of antiinflammatory agents, narcotics, and other central nervous system-targeted pharmaceuticals.17 Bone cancer pain often responds well to opioids, although the doses required to decrease the pain tend to be high (120 mg per day).18 However, even among patients in whom opiates can control the chronic pain, 63% of patients describe one or more daily episode(s) of breakthrough pain. One difficulty with this breakthrough pain is that systemic opioid doses required to control this intermittent pain produce diverse and disabling side effects that may diminish quality of life. Opioid management of such pain is not directed at the cause of the pain; consequently, numerous organs are impacted by these treatments. Treatments can have diverse and disabling side effects, including confusion; somnolence; agitation; constipation; poor quality of life; and, in many patients, persistent pain
Developing new treatments for patients with bone cancer pain will depend on the identification of an experimental animal model that parallels the human condition and then will depend on providing new knowledge defining the cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for the generation and maintenance of this pain. Recently, much progress has been made in this regard, and both the development of an experimental animal model of bone cancer pain and mechanistic insights from study of the model have provided exciting direction for designing new therapies.Advances in the treatment of patients with bone cancer pain is needed desperately but is dependent on improving our understanding of the mechanisms that generate and maintain this debilitating pain. Until recently, there has not been an experimental model for studying bone cancer pain; thus, very little is known about its etiology. For instance, it is not known whether the disease itself can cause pain, and it is not known whether the influence of cancer on components of the bone microenvironment causes pain. Candidate tissues include mineralized bone, primary afferent neurons, and tumor-associated inflammatory cells.

The two primary obstacles to improving our understanding of the mechanisms that cause bone cancer pain have been the absence of an experimental animal model and the absence of knowledge regarding the neurobiologic characteristics of bone cancer pain. That is, does bone cancer pain differ from the well-characterized painful conditions of inflammation and neuropathy? Recent work has overcome these obstacles and has provided a foundation on which the opportunity for significant future discovery rests
Major advances in the prevention and treatment of bone cancer pain will require new insights into the mechanisms that initiate and maintain this debilitating pain state. Recent work provides significant opportunity for advancing mechanistic knowledge of this condition. It is now known that, at the level of peripheral tissue, both disease-induced bone loss and the presence of tumor contribute to the painful state. It is now known that bone malignancies induce peripheral and central sensitization of the nervous system. Future investigation defining the molecular means through which this sensitization occurs will be essential to improve therapy for patients with bone cancer pain and may provide direction in managing patients with inflammatory and neuropathic pain states.Symptom interval (SI), the time from first symptom/sign to diagnosis and initiation of treatment, appears to be principally influenced by tumour biology. Whether the age of the patient, patient delay, professional delay and access to health professionals influences the SI in bone tumours was investigated in this study.

115 patients with newly diagnosed osteosarcoma and Ewing's sarcoma were retrospectively reviewed. The median total SI for all bone tumours was 3.8 months (range 1–46 months). Patients older than 12 years had a longer SI (P=0.05) and more patient delays (P=0.02). Total SI and professional delays were longer if the General Practitioner was first seen compared with an Accident and Emergency Consultant (P=0.02 and 0.02, respectively). However, SI did not influence overall and event-free survival in this series. Bone tumour patients have long SIs that are significantly affected by age and local health-care support systems. Early referral to specialists would help to alleviate anxiety and distress to the patient and family, even if currently delay does not influence outcome.
The inhibition of glyoxalase I leads to antitumour activity through the accumulation of methylglyoxal. Our earlier observations suggested that methotrexate (MTX) may affect the glyoxalase system. This prompted a serial study of the drug on this metabolic pathway. Ten children with acute lymphoid leukaemia (ALL), admitted to our department between January 2002 and July 2003, were enrolled. Plasma d-lactate was assayed before, 24 and 72 h after the start of four consecutive MTX infusions (5 g/m2/24 h) in each patient. Inhibition of glyoxalase I was tested in vitro, using human erythrocyte lysates and yeast enzyme. The elevated initial plasma d-lactate levels (P < 0.02) fell significantly (P < 0.001) in response to 24 h MTX infusions. In vitro, MTX, folic and folinic acids inhibited the activity of glyoxalase I. Thus, MTX seems to affect the α-oxoaldehyde metabolism in vivo, as a likely consequence of glyoxalase I inhibition. This action probably contributes to the anticancer activity and toxicity of the drug.
Primary bone cancers are extremely rare neoplasms, likely accounting for fewer than 0.2% of all cancers, although its true incidence is difficult to determine secondary to the rarity of these tumors.1,2 In 2009, an estimated 2570 new cases will be diagnosed in the United States and 1470 people will die of the disease.3 Primary bone cancers show wide clinical heterogeneity and are often curable with proper treatment. Osteosarcoma (35%), chondrosarcoma (30%), and Ewing's sarcoma (16%) are the 3 most common forms of bone cancer. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) and fibrosarcoma of the bone constitute fewer than 1% of all primary bone tumors. Chondrosarcoma is usually found in middle-aged and older adults; osteosarcoma and Ewing's sarcoma develop mainly in children and young adults. Various bone cancers are named based on their histologic origin: chondrosarcomas arise from cartilage, osteosarcomas arise from bone, and fibrogenic tissue is the origin of fibrosarcoma of bone, whereas vascular tissue gives rise to hemangioendothelioma and hemangiopericytoma. Notochordal tissue gives rise to chordoma. Several primary bone cancers, including Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT), are of unknown histologic origin.

The pathogenesis and etiology of most bone cancers remain unclear. Gene rearrangements in the EWS and ETS family of genes have been implicated in the pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma.4–7 Specific genetic alterations also play a role in osteosarcoma pathogenesis.8,9 Although trauma is frequently implicated in sarcomas, a cause-and-effect relationship between a traumatic event and the development of bone cancer has not been identified. A quantifiable risk exists for developing bone sarcomas after therapeutic radiation.10,11 Osteosarcoma is the most common radiation-induced sarcoma, and is the most common second primary malignancy in patients with a history of retinoblastoma.12,13 Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a hereditary cancer syndrome in which there is a germ-line mutation of the p53 gene resulting in sarcomas such as osteosarcoma, early onset of bilateral breast cancer, and several other neoplasms.14–17

In the past, a diagnosis of osteosarcoma and Ewing's sarcoma was associated with a poor prognosis. A generation ago, Marcove et al. described the survival pattern of newly diagnosed patients with osteosarcoma
presenting to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC), reporting that nearly 80% of patients would develop metastatic disease and ultimately die of the disease. All patients with extremity osteosarcomas were treated with amputation. The development of multiagent chemotherapy regimens for neoadjuvant and adjuvant treatment has considerably improved the prognosis of these patients. With current multimodality treatment, approximately three quarters of all patients diagnosed with osteosarcoma are cured. Nearly 90% of adult patients diagnosed with osteosarcoma are successfully treated with limb-sparing approaches rather than amputation; progression-free survival (PFS) has been observed in 60% to 75% of patients with localized Ewing's sarcoma. In osteosarcoma and Ewing's sarcoma, a cure is still achievable, even in patients diagnosed with metastatic disease at presentation.18–20
The NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Bone Cancer (to view the most recent version of these guidelines, visit the NCCN Web site at www.NCCN.org) focus on chondrosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma, and osteosarcoma.
rimary bone tumors and selected metastatic tumors should be evaluated and treated by a multidisciplinary team with demonstrated expertise in the management of these tumors. Appropriate team members are listed on page 696. Long-term surveillance and follow-up are necessary when considering the risk for recurrence and comorbidities associated with chemotherapy and radiation therapy (RT). Extended therapy and surveillance may be necessary for long-term survivors to address the potential side effects of surgery, RT, and chemotherapy. Patients should be given a survivorship prescription to schedule follow-ups with a multidisciplinary team. Fertility issues should be discussed with appropriate patients before they start treatment.22

Diagnostic Workup
Suspicion of a malignant bone tumor often begins when a poorly marginated lesion is seen on a plain radiograph in a patient with a painful lesion. In patients younger than 40 years, an aggressive, painful bone lesion has a significant risk for being a malignant primary bone tumor, and referral to an orthopedic oncologist should be considered before further workup. Patients 40 years and older whose plain films and history do not suggest a specific diagnosis should undergo evaluation for metastatic carcinoma, including chest radiograph; chest, abdominal, and pelvic CT; bone scan; mammogram; and other imaging studies as clinically indicated (see page 690).23

All patients with suspected bone sarcomas should undergo complete staging before biopsy. Standard staging workup for a suspected primary bone sarcoma should include chest imaging (chest radiograph or CT to detect pulmonary metastases), appropriate imaging of the primary site (plain radiographs, MRI for local staging, and/or CT scan), and bone scan.24 Imaging of painless bone lesions should be evaluated by a musculoskeletal radiologist followed by appropriate referral to a multidisciplinary treatment team if necessary. Laboratory studies, such as a CBC, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), or alkaline phosphatase, should be performed before treatment is initiated.

PET is an alternative imaging technique used in the pretreatment staging of soft tissue and bone sarcomas.25 Recent reports have shown the efficacy of PET scans in evaluating chemotherapy response in osteosarcoma and ESFT.26,27

Biopsy should be performed using either core needle or surgical biopsy techniques. At biopsy, careful consideration should be given to appropriate stabilization of the affected bone and/or measures to protect against impending pathologic fracture. Because location of the biopsy is critical to limb-salvage techniques, it should be performed at the facility that will provide definitive management of the suspected primary malignant bone tumor.


Surgical margins should be negative, wide enough to minimize potential local recurrence, and narrow enough to maximize function. Wide excision implies histologically negative surgical margins and is necessary to optimize local control. Local tumor control may be achieved either through limb-sparing resection or limb amputation, although in selected cases, amputation may be the most appropriate option. However, limb-sparing resection is preferred if reasonable functional outcomes can be achieved. Response to the preoperative regimen should be evaluated with pathologic mapping. Consultation with a physical therapist is recommended to evaluate for mobility training and to determine an appropriate rehabilitation program.
Chondrosarcomas characteristically produce cartilage matrix from neoplastic tissue devoid of osteoid and may occur at any age, but are more common in older adults.28–30 Conventional chondrosarcomas of the bone constitute approximately 85% of all chondrosarcomas and are divided as either primary or central lesions arising from previously normal-appearing bone preformed from cartilage; secondary or peripheral tumors that arise or develop from preexisting benign cartilage lesions, such as enchondromas; or from the cartilaginous portion of an osteochondroma.29,31,32

Malignant transformation has been reported in lesions found in patients with Ollier's disease (enchondromatosis). The anatomic location, histologic grade, and size are essential prognostic features of the lesion, despite whether it is primary or secondary, or central or peripheral.33–36 Peripheral or secondary tumors are usually low grade with infrequent metastasis.37 Other rare subtypes that constitute approximately 10% to 15% of all chondrosarcomas29 include clear cell, dedifferentiated, myxoid, and mesenchymal forms.

Symptoms of chondrosarcoma are usually mild and depend on tumor size and location. Patients with pelvic or axial lesions typically present later in the disease course, because the associated pain has a more insidious onset and often occurs when the tumor has reached a significant size.33,38,39 Central chondrosarcomas show cortical destruction and loss of medullary bone trabeculations on radiographs, as well as calcification and destruction.38

MRI will show the intramedullary involvement and extraosseous extension of the tumor. Secondary lesions arise from preexisting lesions. Serial radiographs will show a slow increase in size of the osteochondroma or enchondroma. A cartilage “cap” measuring greater than 2 cm on a preexisting lesion or documented growth after skeletal maturity should suggest sarcomatous transformation.
Histologic grade and tumor locations are the most important variables used to determine primary treatment. Resectable low-grade and intracompartmental lesions are treated with intralesional excision with or without adjuvant therapy.41–44 Wide excision with negative margins is the preferred treatment for some low-grade lesions because of their larger size and intraarticular or pelvic localization. High-grade (grade II, III, or clear cell) or extracompartmental lesions are treated with wide excision, if resectable, obtaining negative surgical margins.34

Unresectable high- and low-grade lesions are treated with RT (see page 691). Proton-beam RT has been associated with excellent local tumor control and long-term survival in patients with low-grade skull base chondrosarcomas.45,46

Chemotherapy is not very effective in chondrosarcomas, especially in conventional and dedifferentiated chondrosarcomas. Although Mitchell et al.47 reported that adjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin and doxorubicin was associated with improved survival in patients with dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma, this finding could not be confirmed in other studies.48–50 Recently, Cesari et al.51 reported that the addition of chemotherapy improved survival rates in patients with mesenchymal chondrosarcoma. Another report from the German study group also confirmed that the outcome was better in younger patients.52 However, no prospective randomized trials have been performed, and therefore the role of chemotherapy in the treatment of chondrosarcomas remains undefined.

No chemotherapy regimens have been established for conventional chondrosarcoma (grades 1–3). The NCCN Bone Cancer Guidelines suggest that dedifferentiated chondrosarcomas could be treated as osteosarcoma, and mesenchymal chondrosarcomas treated as Ewing's sarcoma, best approached as a function of their grade. Both of these options have a category 2B recommendation.
Surveillance for low-grade lesions consists of a physical examination, imaging of the lesion, and a chest radiograph every 6 to 12 months for 2 years, then yearly as appropriate. Surveillance for high-grade lesions consists of a physical examination, imaging of the primary site, and/or cross-sectional imaging as indicated. Chest imaging is also indicated every 3 to 6 months for the first 5 years, and yearly thereafter for a minimum of 10 years, because late metastases and recurrences after 5 years are more common with chondrosarcoma than with other sarcomas.35 Functional assessment should be performed at every visit
ESFT are a group of small, round-cell neoplasms that include Ewing's sarcoma, primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET), Askin's tumor, PNET of bone, and extraosseous Ewing's sarcoma. Ewing's sarcoma is characterized by the fusion of the EWS gene on chromosome 22q12 with various members of the ETS gene family (FLI1, ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and FEV).5,6 The EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript resulting from the chromosomal translocation t(11;22) (q24;q12) is identified in approximately 85% of Ewing's sarcomas, such as Ewing's sarcoma, PNET, and Askin's tumor.

Ewing's sarcoma is poorly differentiated and is also characterized by the strong expression of cell-surface glycoprotein MIC2 (CD99).53,54 The expression of MIC2 may be useful in the differential diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma and PNET from other small round-cell neoplasms, although it is not exclusively specific to these tumors.55

Ewing's sarcoma typically occurs in adolescents and young adults; the most common primary sites are the femur, pelvic bones, and bones of chest wall, although any bone may be affected. When arising in a long bone, the diaphysis is the most frequently affected site and appears mottled on imaging. Periosteal reaction is classic and is referred to as “onion skin” by radiologists.

Patients with Ewing's sarcoma, similar to those with bone sarcomas, present with localized pain or swelling. Unlike with other bone sarcomas, constitutional symptoms, such as fever, weight loss, and fatigue, are occasionally noted at presentation. Abnormal laboratory studies may include elevated serum LDH and leukocytosis.

Important indicators of favorable prognosis include a distal site of primary disease, normal serum LDH level at presentation, and absence of metastatic disease at presentation.56–58 Nearly one quarter will present with metastatic disease, which is the most significant adverse prognostic factor in Ewing's sarcoma as it is for other bone sarcomas.59,60 Lungs, bones, and bone marrow are the most common sites of metastasis. In a retrospective analysis of 975 patients from the European Intergroup Cooperative Ewing's Sarcoma Study (EICESS) Group, 5-year relapse-free survival was 22% for patients with metastatic disease at diagnosis compared with 55% for those without.60 The results of the Intergroup Ewing's Sarcoma Study, analyzing the clinicopathologic features of 303 cases of Ewing's sarcoma, showed that patients with primary tumors in pelvic bones have the lowest survival rates compared with those with lesions in distal bones of the extremities.
When ESFT is suspected, patients should undergo complete staging before biopsy. This should include CT of the chest, plain radiographs of the primary site, CT or MRI of the entire bone or area involved, PET scan, and/or bone scan. An MRI of the spine and pelvis should also be considered. An ongoing diagnostic study is comparing whole-body MRI and conventional imaging for detecting distant metastases in pediatric patients with ESFT, Hodgkin lymphoma, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and neuroblastoma (www.cancer.gov/clinicaltrials/ACRIN-6660).

Cytogenetic analysis of the biopsy specimen should be obtained to evaluate the t(11;22) translocation. Although preliminary reports suggest that EWS-FLI1 translocation is associated with a better prognosis than other variants,62–64 this must be evaluated in large clinical trials. Bone marrow biopsy should be considered to complete the workup. Because serum LDH has been shown to have prognostic value as a tumor marker, the NCCN Bone Cancer Guidelines have included this test as part of the initial evaluation (see page 692). Fertility consultation should be considered for women of child-bearing age and men.
Multiagent chemotherapy regimens, including ifosfamide and/or cyclophosphamide; etoposide; doxorubicin and/or dactinomycin; and vincristine have been shown to be effective in patients with localized Ewing's sarcoma in single- and multi-institutional collaborative trials in the United States and Europe.65,66

The Intergroup Ewing's Sarcoma Studies (IESS-I and IESS-II) showed that the 4-drug regimen VACD (vincristine, dactinomycin, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin) was superior to the 3-drug regimen VAC (vincristine, dactinomycin, and cyclophosphamide) in terms of relapse-free (60% vs. 24%) and overall survival.67,68

In the Pediatric Oncology Group-Children's Cancer Group (POG-CCG) study (INT-0091), patients with Ewing's sarcoma or PNET of the bone were randomized to undergo chemotherapy with VACD alone or alternating with ifosfamide and etoposide (VACD-IE) for 17 cycles.69 In patients with nonmetastatic disease, the 5-year event-free survival rate was 69% in the VACD-IE group compared with 54% in the VACD alone group. Overall survival was also significantly higher among patients in the VACD-IE group (72% vs. 61%). However, the addition of ifosfamide and etoposide to VACD did not improve outcomes of patients with Ewing's sarcoma or PNET of bone with metastases at diagnosis.70 Kolb et al.71 from MSKCC also reported similar findings. The 4-year event-free and overall survival rates were 82% and 89%, respectively, for patients with locoregional disease, and 12% and 17.8%, respectively, for those with distant metastases.

The EICESS-92 study investigated whether cyclophosphamide has a similar efficacy to ifosfamide in standard-risk patients and whether the addition of etoposide improves survival in high-risk patients with Ewing's sarcoma. Standard-risk patients (small tumors) were randomly assigned to VAIA (vincristine, dactinomycin, ifosfamide, and doxorubicin) followed by either VAIA or VACA (vincristine, dactinomycin, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin).72 High-risk patients (large tumors or metastatic disease at diagnosis) were randomly assigned to VAIA or VAIA plus etoposide (EVAIA). For the standard-risk patients, 3-year event-free survival rates for VACA and VAIA were 73% and 74%, respectively. In the high-risk patients, the 3-year event-free survival rates for EVAIA and VAIA were 52% and 47%, respectively. The results of this study suggest that cyclophosphamide has the same efficacy as ifosfamide in standard-risk patients. Furthermore, the event-free survival rates in the high-risk group, though not statistically significant, suggest a benefit with the addition of etoposide to ifosfamide.

The European Ewing Tumour Working Initiative of National Groups 1999 (EURO-EWING 99) study is designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of combination chemotherapy with or without peripheral stem cell transplantation, RT, and/or surgery in patients with Ewing's sarcoma. Six courses of VIDE (vincristine, ifosfamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide) are administered as an intensive induction chemotherapy for patients with ESFT.73

NCCN Recommendations: All patients with Ewing's sarcoma undergo primary treatment followed by local control therapy and adjuvant treatment (see page 693). Primary treatment consists of multiagent chemotherapy along with appropriate growth factor support for 12 to 24 weeks (see the NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Myeloid Growth Factors for growth factor support; to view the most recent version of these guidelines, visit the NCCN Web site at www.NCCN.org). For localized Ewing's sarcoma, VAC alternating with ifosfamide and etoposide (VAC/IE) given on an every-2-week schedule was found to be more effective than on an every-3-week schedule, with median 3-year event-free survival rates of 76% and 65%, respectively.74

The NCCN guidelines have included the following regimens for first-line therapy (primary/neoadjuvant/adjuvant) for patients with localized disease or metastatic disease at presentation
The guidelines recommend VAC (without the alternating cycle of ifosfamide and etoposide) as the preferred option for the treatment for primary metastatic disease at presentation.70,71 VAC/IE, VIDE, and VIA regimens are included as alternative treatment options.

After primary treatment, patients should be restaged with an MRI of the lesion and chest imaging. PET or bone scan can be used for restaging depending on the imaging technique used during initial workup. Patients responding to primary treatment should be treated with local control therapy. Local control options include wide excision with or without preoperative RT,75,76 definitive RT with chemotherapy, or amputation in selected cases (see page 693). Adjuvant chemotherapy with or without RT is recommended (regardless of surgical margins) after local control treatment (surgery or RT). The panel strongly recommends that the duration of chemotherapy be 28 and 49 weeks, depending on the type of regimen and dosing schedule (category 1).

Progressive disease after primary treatment is best managed with RT with or without surgery, followed by chemotherapy or best supportive care



